[[PAGE 2]]
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher assumes no
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information
contained herein.
THE GOLFER'S PRACTICE PLAN: DRILLS AND INSIGHT TO SLASH YOUR SCORES
First edition. January 1, 2019.
Copyright © 2019 The Golf Academy.
Written by Mitchell Sullivan

[[PAGE 4]]
Introduction: Why Practice?
Golf is a fickle game. It’s based on such a simple principle; simply hole out in as few strokes as
possible, but unfortunately, this is much harder than it sounds? So what makes this game so difficult?
From my experience, the more I play this game the more I realize that golf’s difficulty comes from the
scale of movements and mis-movements that a player makes.
While you might think you made the same swing you normally do, a couple millimeters of change above,
below, left, or right of the ball at contact can completely change the outcome of your shot.
Similarly, two or three degrees of adjustment in how the club strikes the ball can be the difference
between your shot flying down the fairway or slicing into the water. This required level of precision, in
my opinion, is frustrating for a lot of golfers and is the single biggest limitation of a player’s
improvement.
Although these small physical changes in each swing dramatically affect your round, this really is what
makes the game fun and satisfying to play at a high level. To be truly exceptional, and to do so
consistently, highlights how excruciatingly precise your movements must be.
So how do golfers even get “that good”? How did Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy, or even your scratch-
golfing buddy get to such a high level of ability? Well, I can guarantee it wasn’t by luck and, although
pros might have access to the best coaching and teaching, it wasn’t ultimately due to the help of
someone else either. I believe it really does come down to one thing. Plain and simple; they just
practice.
In one of my favorite golf books “Tiger Woods: How I Play Golf”, Tiger speaks to the roughly 500 balls a
day he would hit before he would head to the practice green for 2-3 hours. That is nearly five large
buckets we would hit at the range and well over double the time an average golfer spends on the

[[PAGE 5]]
practice green. Then, after this “warmup”, he would go out and play nine holes. I guess it should come
as no surprise when he was the youngest golfer ever to win the Master’s after following this routine for
over 10 years.
Now this is a great story but, to be frank, none of us really have the time or likely motivation to do this
every day. There simply are too many other things that consume our time. Work, family, school, and a
million other things constantly demand our time, and at the end of the week, usually there isn’t much
free time left to do what we want to do.
What we really need is a middle ground between the relentless practice regiment professionals follow
and the lack of practice that many of your fellow golfers follow.
That is exactly what I want this book to provide for you.
While I can’t knock in the putts on the practice green or snap drives down range for you, what I can do is
provide you with the best advice and drill work I have aggregated over the past decade I’ve spent
teaching golf. While this is by no means a comprehensive list, this is intended to give you the tools to
start a consistent, effective practice routine with a few of the most powerful drills I have come across.
I have a lot of great information that I can’t wait to share with you so let me explain what you should
expect from the rest of this guide:
First, we’ll talk about how to build a practice plan that will deliver measurable results with a reasonable,
consistent, time commitment. Then, once we’ve made our plan, we’ll talk about the best drills I’ve come
across for each area of your golf game. After that is all squared away, we’ll give you a few ideas on how
to practice away from home, a couple final pieces of advice, and we’ll send you on your way to the
practice range, so you can start improving.
If that’s something you’re on board with, we can start with step one; making your practice plan.

[[PAGE 6]]
The Practical Practice Plan
Part One: Time
If you’re anything like I am, you love playing golf and you want to improve. Maybe you wish there were
a few extra hours a day, so you could squeeze in some more golf, but it’s just so hard to find the time.
It’s not easy to find time to play, much less practice, but unfortunately there’s only so much
improvement you can do on the course. You might only hit between 70-120 strokes during a round of
golf with nearly half of those being putts. This leaves you with only a handful of chips, iron shots, and
drives scattered across a few hours. This is not nearly enough to see any real improvement.
So, if we can’t get that much better by just playing, how can we make practice more enjoyable or at
least more efficient, so we can get the most out of the time we do have?
The best answer I can give you is, make a practice plan.
As you begin developing your new plan, think about how much practice time you can realistically
commit to practice; the plan is useless if you can’t follow it consistently. Ideally, 30-60 minutes once or
twice a week would be an ideal level of commitment. This amount of time is just long enough to cover
each part of your game quickly, or, enough time to really dig into one specific area that needs
improvement without being monotonous.
This part of the plan can be very flexible and allows you to fit in a little golf, regardless of your schedule.
One student of mine a few years ago could only squeeze in two 30-minute sessions of practice a week
after work. While one hour out of 168 in a week is not a ton, I received an email describing this young
man’s journey from shooting 100+ to just under 90 over the course a summer. This system really does

[[PAGE 7]]
work, but it will require a time commitment from you, consistently, before you see the improvement
you are looking for.
Similarly to going to the gym or working out, it’s not necessary to spend hours doing something, but it is
important that you make a commitment to showing up consistently if you want to see results. So, make
a small pact with yourself to go practice right now and, once you’ve made your commitment, let’s talk
about the second part of our plan.
Part Two: Content
Now that you’ve settled on a reasonable time commitment, it’s time to figure out what we’re going to
do during this time. Some options might come to mind immediately but, broadly speaking, your options
include:
• Putting
• Chipping, pitching, and sand shots
• Approach shots and recovery shots
• Full swings (irons and woods)
This is obviously quite a short list, but I would be willing to wager than any other practice ideas you
might be interested in will fit into one of these categories. Continuing with that idea, I would
recommend picking out one, or at most two, of the above areas to practice during your sessions. I’ve
found that it’s just easier to organize your thoughts and get into a groove if you’re not trying to practice
different areas of your game every ten minutes.
Personally, I like to practice once a week for about an hour. Each week I will pick one of the elements
above that focuses on my short game and one that focuses more on my long game. For example, this

[[PAGE 8]]
might include hitting a small bucket of balls focused on targets in the 100-150 yard range and then
heading to the practice green to work on bump and run chips from the rough.
While it might not seem like a lot, it’s amazing how much you can accomplish if you don’t get bogged
down trying to practice every part of your game in one hour. While I might come to the range with this
plan, if I get through my plan quicker than expected, picking up a few extra short-range putts or hitting a
couple more chips helps ensure I get the most out of the time I allocated for practice.
I hope you’re beginning to see the idea behind our new practice plan. It really can be as flexible as you
want or need it to be, but I’ve learned that having a plan in place is the best way to hold myself
accountable for going to practice.
So now that you have the framework of a plan laid out, we need to figure out what we’re going to fill
this time with.
Now, you could decide on a time to go to the range, grab a bucket of balls, and go to town, but you
would be missing out on a great opportunity to get better. Similarly to the idea of having your goals in
mind when you get to practice, forcing yourself to be mentally engaged in the drills you’re performing is
an absolute requirement if you want to get better.
The Art of the Drill
Everyone has done drills before but one of the questions I’m always asked is, why? Why are drills that
much more effective and why should I spend a portion of my practice session setting up for them? After
all, wouldn’t I get more swings, chips, or putts in if I didn’t spend that time setting everything up?

[[PAGE 9]]
Well, technically, yes. But the number of putts, similarly to the number of swings at the range is not
what matters when it comes to improving. The two thing that will truly drive your improvement are your
focus and the quality of your time spent.
We can convince you of this using a situation outside of golf. Have you ever been in a conversation with
someone where you just had something else on your mind? Or maybe you’ve caught yourself
responding or acknowledging someone else without thinking about it?
I’ll bet this has happened to just about every one of us and I want you to think about what happened
during those moments. Can you what was said, or what you did during that time? I’ll bet you can’t.
This is exactly what happens to your mind and body during an unfocused practice session.
I mean let’s be honest, you’ve set aside your valuable free time to go practice, so go one step further
and make sure you actually get something out of that time.
If you head to the putting green and slap putts at all the holes around the green while you think about
your weekend plans, what’s for dinner, or anything else, you will not get anything out of your practice
session.
This, is exactly why we use drills.
Drills, or at least the ones I have included later in this guide, are all designed to ensure you get quality
reps. This means the drill constantly forces you to focus on what you’re doing. This keeps you engaged
and facilitates the improvements that you are looking for.
So how do these drills do this? Let’s go over what makes a drill so effective, so you can evaluate new
ones you come across.

[[PAGE 10]]
• Specificity. A great drill should focus on one situation or goal. For example, if you wanted to
work on your chipping, instead of throwing some balls next to the green to chip you could
create a pile in the rough to practice bump and run chips on a downslope. Instead of practicing
the generic skill of “chipping”, you are practicing the shot exactly how you would perform it
during a round. By repeating a unique shot, you commit that specific movement to memory.
This makes it easier to be confident in a similar movement during your round.
• Measurable/Competitive. The most popular drills I’ve taught have all contained something
measurable to track your progress. It’s one thing to hit a solid iron on the driving range but it’s
an entirely different, and in my opinion more effective decision, to keep track of how many iron
shots out of 30 have hit the green you’re aiming for.
On the same note, competing against yourself or a friend is, in the decade I have taught golf, the
single best way to keep someone engaged while they practice. Sure, making eight out of ten,
five-foot putts is great, but when you are keeping track of how many putts you’ve made versus a
friend, every stroke has a little added pressure. Again, this addition of nerves and competition
more closely replicates an actual round and makes it easier to transfer this skill to the five-foot
birdie putt you might be standing over on the eighteenth hole.
There are other qualities that make drills effective or fun but as we continue below these are the two
elements of each drill I will try to highlight. And now, after humoring some of the theory presented
above, we can finally start to get into the some of the drills I have picked out for you.

[[PAGE 11]]
Drills
Putting:
Our first drill is one of my absolute favorites and simulates one of the most important shots in golf; the
short to “short-ish” putt.
1-3-5 Foot Drill
Materials: 4-10 golf tees, 3 golf balls, a golf cup
Works On: Consistency with short putts, mechanical consistency, confidence around the cup
Process: Sink anywhere between 4 and 10 golf tees into the ground in a circle that’s one, three, or five
feet from the cup. Take three putts from each tee and record the number of makes you have. Repeat as
desired from different distances and track your progress overtime. A mock set up is shown below.
Purpose: This drill focuses on improving the consistency of your short putts from one, three, or five feet
from the hole. These can be some of the most nerve-wracking moments of a golfer’s round and one of
the most demoralizing misses a golfer might face as these distances are all within a makeable range. To

[[PAGE 12]]
get the most out of this drill, pick a couple spots the practice green so you can get a variety of different
breaks on your putts. This should help improve your confidence and consistency out on the course.
Putting Ladder
Materials: 3-5 golf tees, golf ball, a golf cup
Works On: Reading greens and breaks, confidence and composure on longer putts
Process: Sink 3-5 golf tees in the green forming a line that gets incrementally further from the hole.
Increments are discretionary but 1-2 feet or half a club length are what I tend to gravitate towards. From
here, begin at the closest tee and after each made putt, move to the next tee back until you’ve sank a
putt from each distance. However, on each miss, return to the starting tee.

[[PAGE 13]]
Purpose: The main purpose of this drill is to closely simulate putting conditions during your round by
making it more difficult to memorize the speed and break of each putt. However, by forcing the player
to return to the beginning on each missed putt, this drill forces the golfer to hit a higher percentage of
short-range putts than longer ranged ones. While this isn’t necessary for every drill, it is very likely that
you will hit more short-range putts during a round and this drill can help prepare you for that.
Similarly, by forcing the golfer to return to the start after each miss, this drill can begin to activate some
of the nerves or jitters a golfer can experience during a round or tournament. To get the most out of
this, try practicing this drill with a friend and count how many times you return to the start. This is a
fantastic way to not only have a great time competing against someone but also add a little more
pressure to those last long putts.
Distance Control
Materials: a few golf balls, one additional club besides your putter, a golf hole
Works On: Distance control for lag putts
Process: This lag putting drill focuses on controlling the energy you put into your putts. To perform this
drill, choose a spot to lag putt from, likely at least 20 feet away or more. I like to do a couple distances;
20, 30, and 50 feet to get a wider range of reads and breaks.
Next, place your extra club about a club length or so behind the hole; this is your backstop. From there,
hit putts towards the hole and try to get the ball to stop past the hole but in front of the backstop you
made with your club. Keep track of your percentage at each location and repeat for different breaks and
distances.

[[PAGE 14]]
Purpose: This drill specifically isolates distance control purposely. While it’s always great to hole out a
long putt or stick one close, it is more important that you get the distance right during your lag putts.
Ideally, the distance you placed the club from the hole is the distance you are comfortable making a
return putt should you miss the lag putt.
Now, while it might be possible to roll a ball slightly short and leave yourself a close putt, that is actually
counterproductive to what you should focus on during your lag putts. Although we never want to leave
ourselves a overly long return putt, we also do not ever want to leave a putt short of the hole, as even a
perfect line would not have resulted in a made putt. For this reason alone, I believe this is a great drill
for anyone who struggles to score well once they make it onto the green.
PUTTZ
Materials: golf ball, a golf cup, one friend to play with
Works On: Various aspects of putting, composure and confidence, just having fun golfing
Process: This drill puts a spin on the classic basketball game HORSE. In this game, one player chooses a
spot to putt from and each player tracks how many strokes it takes to hole out from this location.
Whichever player takes more strokes to hole out receives the first letter of ‘PUTTZ’ and the game
repeats. This continues until one player misses five shots that his opponent makes and gains all the
letters to PUTTZ.
Purpose: Now, although this drill doesn’t pass our specificity requirement from above, it is still a
personal favorite of mine. PUTTZ will still work on a golfer’s putting skills, but the emphasis of this game
is to simply enjoy spending time competing against a friend. This drill is certainly something you could
do by yourself, but this game is a great way to waste some time while you’re waiting for another buddy

[[PAGE 15]]
or your tee time. It’s easy to set up, competitive, fun, and one of my personal favorites when it comes to
practicing putting.
Chipping:
Name: Around the Green
Materials: handful of golf balls (ideally 50 or so), a few clubs to chip with, 8 or so wooden tees
Works On: Chipping distance and accuracy control, ball striking from various lies
Process: Select a hole to aim at and set up a circle of wooden tees around the cup. From there, select
two to four spots around the green to chip from allotting anywhere between 10-25 balls for each spot.
After setting up, chip each shot towards a specific hole you have chosen and record the number or
percentage of shots that land within the circle.
Purpose: This drill is very similar to what most golfers do when they choose to practice their chipping.
They head to the green, toss down some balls, and chip away at the hole they want. What makes our
Around the Green drill different is one very important feature. The drill above is measurable, and as
such you can evaluate your performance over time. This echoes our advice from above but is worth
repeating again. If you are not tracking your progress how will you ever know if you’re getting better?
In addition to tracking your progress, this drill gives you the versatility to focus on landing chips inside of
different distances from the cup. While you might want to focus on getting your shots inside of three or
five feet for short chips, if you’re pitching the ball from 50 yards away you can absolutely move your
target ring to a distance that is more attainable while still being challenging.

[[PAGE 16]]
Up and Down
Materials: a golf cup, two to four golf balls, clubs to chip with
Works On: Chipping distance and accuracy, focus during live rounds
Process: Similarly to the previous drill, select a cup to aim at on the practice green as well as a position
to chip from. Lay down between one and four golf balls and make your chip at the pin. From there grab
a putter and putt each ball you chipped into the hole, focusing on trying to hole out in only one putt.
Keep track of the number of times you get up-and-down successfully; where you holed out with one
chip and one putt.
Purpose: Although this drill seems very similar to the previous drill above, it focuses on a few slightly
different things. While both drills will likely improve your chipping, this drill requires golfers to be able to
change shot types and styles quickly in order be successful. If you’ve ever warmed up at the range
beautifully only to shank balls once you walked on the course, you have experienced this phenomenon
in a different sense. While it might be easy to chip a ball close to the hole after you have gotten used to
hitting that shot, it is much harder to chip, putt, and then go back to chipping again from a different
area.
It is for this reason that I recommend using only two balls for this drill. While there are a million other
ways I could practice my chipping, what I really want to focus on with this drill is being able to continue
my focus from one type of shot to the next as you would have to do during an actual round.
This gives me the opportunity to focus more on the mental and strategic part of my game instead of
solely physical improvement. In my opinion, this is as important if not more important than having solid
mechanical fundamentals around the green.

[[PAGE 17]]
If you are unable to properly read a green, evaluate playing conditions, or think strategically about how
your next shot will play out, your physical skill will only take you so far. That is why I think this is one of
the most valuable drills for a golfer to practice consistently.
The Bucket Drill
Materials: A bucket (5 gallon buckets works well), 20-50 golf balls, a few clubs to chip with
Works On: Ball contact during chips, mechanical consistency
Process: Set up a bucket about 15-20 feet away from your pile of 20-50 balls. From there chip balls
either into the top of the bucket or into the side of the bucket. Record the number of points you earn
from each chip; earning one point for hitting the bucket at all, two points for hitting the bucket on the
fly, and three points for landing the ball into the bucket. Total up your points and then change locations.
Purpose: Similar to the game PUTTZ in the last section, this is also a game that is fun to play with
another person. Simply take turns chipping or bring two buckets to get the benefits of a little added
competition and comradery.
Besides the opportunity for fun, this drill focuses almost entirely on the physical side of golf. While it
might seem monotonous to chip hundreds of balls around the green, making a game out of practice,
keeping score, and having a very clearly defined target to shoot at is one way to ingrain a strong
fundamental swing.
Along these same lines, each point value represents a higher level of physical competence. For example,
you could top a chip and still get one point for hitting the bucket on the ground, however, if you want to
truly score well, perfecting your stroke so you can consistently drop the ball into the bucket is a must.
More specifically, trying to drop the ball into the bucket will force you to consider stance, line, and wind

[[PAGE 18]]
conditions that you otherwise may not have since good chipping is often times, much harder to quantify
than good putting. Thankfully, this drill helps minimize that problem.
Closest to the Pin
Materials: One to five golf balls, a golf cup, a club to chip with, a friend to play against
Works On: General chipping, confidence and composure
Process: Head to the practice green with a friend and a few golf balls. Between the two of you decide on
a hole to aim at and who will be chipping first. With the technicalities out of the way take alternating
shots towards the cup with the goal of having the shot that is closest to the hole.
From here the game and scoring proceeds like bocce ball; for each ball you have closer to the pin than
your opponents’ closest ball you get a point. After each person has chipped their balls count the score
and move to a new location. This continues until once player reaches an agreed upon score; usually I like
to play to 11.
Purpose: Much the same as most of the other collaborative games we have in this guide, the ultimate
goal of this game is to have a good time and compete against a friend or playing partner. While it might
seem simple enough, this game really does combine the positives of the other drills along with the
added pressure and distraction that comes with competing against someone else. All in all, this is a fun
way to pass the time and get a little light practice in while you’re waiting around the practice green.

[[PAGE 19]]
Full Swings:
Target Practice
Materials: Range balls, a set of clubs, a driving range
Works On: Distance and accuracy control
Process: Once you’ve grabbed a bucket of balls and found a bay at the range choose a relatively close
target and begin to track how often you strike a target, net, or green on the range. Begin with the high
irons and work your way through your bag as you aim for different targets down the range.
Purpose: It might seem unimportant but choosing a specific object to aim at during range sessions is one
of the easiest ways to get better quickly. While it’s easy to go on auto pilot when you start hitting balls
on the range, picking a specific target requires that you not only make solid contact during your shot
consistently, but that you also figure out which clubs will get your ball to the distance you need given a
variety of landing zones, weather conditions, and hazards. After all, what good is solid contact if you fly
the ball 30 yards over the green?
Simulated Hole
Materials: A bucket of range balls, a driving range, a set of clubs, a scorecard or knowledge of a golf
course you recently played.
Works On: Focus, wide range of full swing shots
Process: Using your scorecard or knowledge of a previous course you’ve played, pretend that you are
playing a hole from a recent round starting with the tee shot. From there, based on the result of your
previous shot (short or far, left or right) play your next shot similarly to how you would if you were

[[PAGE 20]]
playing this hole during a round. Continue doing this until you get to the green and then move onto the
next hole.
Purpose: Before explaining the drill let me be completely transparent; this is a very niche drill that I
struggle with frequently. Personally, I have a hard time imagining the holes I typically play as well as
where each shot would leave me for the next one. However, a handful of the golfers I have played with
swear by this drill, especially ones that were playing in a golf league or a tournament at a course they
knew well. While this might be helpful for golfers that have a home course, others might not find it as
helpful.
That being said, this drill serves a similar purpose to the Up and Down drill we highlighted earlier. While
it will certainly help you with the physical part of your game, by distracting you and preventing you from
going into autopilot you will get more out of each ball you hit. If you have developed a pre-shot routine I
would recommend doing this before each shot as well. It can be slow but taking the time to analyze
each shot you take at the range will help build a strong habit for doing the same during your rounds.
Film Yourself
Materials: Golf balls, a driving range or net, clubs, a camera or smartphone that can take video
Works On: Physical consistency
Process: Using a smart phone, camera, or video recorder; head to the range. After taking a few minutes
to warm up, fit a suitable place to record a video of your swing. I recommend using a friend or the back
rest of a chair to help you record the video. From there, start the video and perform the shot as you
would normally; repeat as desired. After taking a handful of clips you should be able to compare the
consistency of your swing, tempo, and dozens of other things as you look for inconsistencies.

[[PAGE 21]]
Purpose: Although this is less of a drill than some of the other entries above, this is a great way to search
for inconsistencies in your golf swing. By recording and analyzing your swing multiple times you can
compare shots that feel and look good with ones that don’t. This can be as simple as watching yourself
stand up during your backswing, or as complicated as analyzing the swing plane of your shot. Either way,
the person who knows your swing the best is you, and you might be surprised how much you can learn
by just watching yourself swing a club at the range.
While this is often not a one-stop-shop for perfecting your swing, discovering something at the range
makes it much easier for a golf pro or a friend to look for the same problem when they watch you play.
Sometimes getting someone else’s insight on a problem you found in your swing can provide the small
reminder needed reinforce a new swing change.
Other Ways to Improve
I get it, golf is a very time intensive game to play. And while you might have crafted the best practice
plan in the world and found the perfect set of drills to improve your game, sometimes there’s nothing
you can do when life gets in the way.
So, what should you do if you find yourself outside of your normal practice groove? Well, assuming
you’re still looking to work on your game while you’re away, you need to find a creative way to get your
practice in. If you’re having a hard time coming up with ideas here are a couple easy things you can do
to get your golf fix in while you’re on the road.

[[PAGE 22]]
Hotel Rooms
Hotel rooms are small, cluttered, fragile rooms that are certainly no place for the game of golf, right?
Well, you might think so, however, Tiger Woods was frequently known to practice hitting flop shots into
the blackout drapes of his hotel rooms while he was on the road.
Although I probably wouldn’t recommend this, bringing a small putting mat, a couple balls, and a putter
or sand wedge with you’re on the road is an interesting way to kill some time at night.
Believe it or not, muscles can begin to atrophy after just a couple weeks and the beautiful swing you’ve
spent hours perfecting will absolutely start to degrade on a long vacation. This might be somewhat
unavoidable but getting a little practice in while you have some downtime away from home can help
decrease how much you lose while you’re away.
Watch or Read About Golf
Being away from the game for a while can wreak havoc on your scores when you return. Unfortunately,
it’s not always possible to bring a putter with you while you travel. So, if you can’t commit to playing golf
physically, working on your game mentally is probably the next best thing. Thankfully, there are dozens
of ways to watch or read about golf, so you never have to be too far away from the sport.
Similarly, to this book itself, there are dozens of eBooks that are free or cheap on the Amazon Kindle
store or other online marketplaces. These can be downloaded for offline trips and are usually short
enough to read over a couple hours during a plane flight.
Besides eBooks, golf websites such as Golf Digest and Golf Week, forums on Reddit or The Sand Trap,
and golf blogs from our website and others can all help you get you golf fix in while you’re on the road.

[[PAGE 23]]
Besides helping you stay up-to-date on the latest golf news, one tidbit or tip from a golfing website
could inspire a new drill when you get back or remind you of an area in your game that needs some
work. Either of these would make it more than worth reading a short ten-minute blog post.
The Wrap-Up
In order to improve at almost anything, we have to practice. You had to ride a bike for hours before you
could take off the training wheels, you practiced cooking your favorite meal dozens of times before you
got it right, and to be honest, golf is no different. In fact, golf might require even more practice to see
some concrete improvement. In my opinion, however, this is what makes golf exciting and interesting to
play.
While almost anyone could figure out how to cook a specific dish in the kitchen, many golfers who pick
up a club today will never truly improve at the game. Why? Because they don’t want to practice
consistently, they don’t know how to practice effectively, or they don’t know what they should be
practicing when they do make it out.
Fortunately for you, we went over all of these things up above.
We talked about how important a consistent and attainable practice plan was for improvement. After
that, we talked about a variety of drills that you can start working on today to begin improving. Finally,
we went over a few ways to keep your game up while you’re away from home. It might not always be
easy, but there’s always a way to get your golf fix in for the day.
Besides this advice, I hope this guide has reminded you how much you enjoy playing this game; and I
hope it might provide just the subtlest nudge of motivation for you to go out and hit an extra bucket this
week or spend a half hour on the practice green.

[[PAGE 24]]
Ultimately, everyone wants to improve, but it’s the things that come along with the improvement that
truly make the practice time worth it. Not only will you feel better after shooting an 80 instead of a 90,
but you’ll also be able to enjoy your game more. You might not spend ten minutes looking for your lost
ball now that you’ve straightened out your tee shots. Or maybe you’ll get a chance to focus more on the
conversation you’re having with a friend or partner instead of worrying about finding an errand shot or
messing up your approach to the green. This sense of relaxation on the golf course has been one of the
most rewarding parts of improving for me personally, and I truly believe that if you commit to practicing
and improving, you will feel the same way as I do when you watch your scores start to drop.
With that said, I wish you the best of luck practicing, and, until next time, let’s grab some range balls, set
up our practice equipment, and go to work on our games. I’ll see you, out on the links.

[[PAGE 25]]
About the Author:
My life from around the age of six has consisted of golf, a lot of golf. Golf has taken me outside
on 40-degree, late November days with my dad, to youth tournaments in my early teens, to the
WIAA state sectionals tournament and now, in early adulthood, to teach golf to teens and adults
across the Midwest.
Additionally, for the past three years I have been the owner of The Golf Academy, a freelance
golf blog offering instruction and advice to golfers of all ages and abilities. Through this
medium, I've had the pleasure of interacting with hundreds of people in the golfing community
and we are only looking to grow from here.
I’ll leave you with my favorite adage from my father, "The worst day on the links still beats the
hell out of any day at work".
Best of luck with your golf game and I’ll see you, out on the links.
-Sully
Reach out to us at:
www.thegolfacademy.org
golfer.academy@gmail.com
@GolferAcademy on Twitter