Contents
3
| Introduction
5 | The Essential Features of a Good Swing
8 | The Stages of the Golf Swing
10
| The Setup –The Grip
15
| The Setup – The Stance
17
| The Swing Begins
20 | The Backswing
21 | The Takeaway
23
| Creating a 2 Lever System in the Backswing
25 | The Backswing to the Top
26 | The Right Hand Bent Drill
27
| The Down Swing
28
| Learning to Swing Under the Right Forearm?
30
| The Swing Unfolds
33
| The Body Pivot
35
| The Shoulders
36
| The Swing Sequence
54
| The Chip Shot
56 | The Pitch Shot
59 | Becoming Your Best Teacher
2
copyright pushgolf2017

Introduction
The wonderful game of golf can also be one of the most frustrating endeavors
anyone can choose to undertake. Yet every year thousands of aspiring hopefuls take
the plunge and try their luck in some of the most beautiful sporting environments
imaginable
People play golf for many different reasons apart from the mere enjoyment. Some
like to play alone, others with friends and business acquaintances, while others play
competitively from the high handicapper to the seasoned tour professional. Indeed
golf is quite a unique sport in that it can be played competitively by people of all
ages, sizes and athletic ability, and both men and women. It is not something though
that can easily mastered any more than one can master a musical instrument in a
couple of weeks. It takes time, practice, and most particularly understanding. It also
requires that a player recognizes his or her particular capabilities in terms of age,
size, strength, athletic ability, patience and dedication.
Interestingly many of the newcomers to the game of golf are in their mid forties and
beyond. Naturally people of this age will not have the same physical strength and
mobility as they may have had when they were younger. It is unfair to expect them for
example to be able to swing a golf club like Rory McIlroy, Jason Day or Adam Scott
who are not only wonderful golfers but highly skilled athletes in their own right. And
yet we are often led to believe that the swing models, positions and power these
players generate are what we should be working towards regardless of our age.
Unfortunately we sometimes have to face reality. Most of us will never be able learn
to swing the like these great players. But that is not to say we cannot have a very
effective golf swing that works to the best of our ability given our age and physical
condition.
While there are many facets to the game of golf – putting, chipping, pitching, iron
play, bunker shots, fairway shots, driving etc. - at the core of golf is the actual
golf swing itself. Without a golf swing that works reasonably well golf will rarely
deliver the satisfaction necessary for a player to want to continue playing the
game. So how should one go about learning a good golf swing, and what in fact
is a good golf swing? Golf’s popularity has turned the game into a multi billion
dollar industry. Many make a very good living out of teaching to beginners and
advanced players alike. But there really is no one teaching method that is
3 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

universally taught by all golf teachers, and students of the game often find themselves trying
different tips and methods from different teachers, even though one thing they learn from one
teacher may not be compatible with something they learn from another teacher. This process
rarely leads to significant improvement and often works to a golfers detriment. It might be
equated for example to putting a Mercedes Benz component into a Mazda and expecting the
car to run at the best of its ability.
For this reason it is advisable that the student of golf stick with the one golf swing taught by a
teacher. However to fully get the most from what the teacher is teaching the student should
learn ‘the method behind the madness’ and decide if that swing is right for them. Put simply
they should understand why for example the instructor teaches a particular takeaway or why
they advocate starting a downswing like they do.
It is with this in mind that we should consider what we might refer to as the Essential
Features or Principles of a Good or Effective Golf Swing. These principles are universal
and apply to all golfers of all ages.
A golf swing model will be presented here that hopefully will enable you, whether young or not
so young to play golf to the best of your ability, injury free. This swing has been developed by
Australian PGA teaching professional Peter Croker who for the past 45 years has dedicated
his life to understanding the great game of golf, first as a touring professional and then as a
golf coach. His past students have included prime ministers, golfing greats and multiple PGA
Teachers of the Year. Collectively, his past students have won 26 Major Championships, 149
US PGA tour, 106 European Tour and 468 Professional Events worldwide. He has played
alongside champions such as Seve Ballesteros, Lee Trevino, Peter Thomson and Greg
Norman, and spent time with. Ben Hogan, Tom Tomasello, Moe Norman, Arnold Palmer and
many others. Peter has written three books and spent many thousands of hours studying
under mentors. He has questioned their methods and delved deeper when needed. Peter is a
great believer that the student should become his own teacher and that one should not just
mechanically learn a swing but understand why the swing is constructed and works like it
does.
With knowledge comes understanding and to completely understand you must always ask
how and why.
The golf swing is built on certain fundamentals that hopefully once understood and
implemented will enable the learning golfer to not only develop a great functional swing, but a
confidence and knowledge to truly “Enjoy the Hit!”
4 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Essential Features of a
Good Golf Swing
There are indeed many different swing models, but an ideal golf swing for
golfers of any age should encompass all of these features.
1. It should be body friendly
2. It should be achievable and not demand that the golfer assume positions that are
too difficult for a normal golfer, including high handicappers to achieve
3. It should enable the golfer to deliver the club to the ball on a down and out path for
solid compression at impact, with the hands ahead of the ball, and the lead arm in a
straight line with the club.
4.It should ensure the golfer can hit the ball with power commensurate with body
shape, strength and athletic ability
5.It should enable the golfer to hit the ball with accuracy
6.It should enable the golfer to have consistency when hitting golf shots
7.It should enable the golfer to deliver the club head to the ball on an ‘in-to-out’
swing path
This might be summarized as BACPACS
(body friendly – achievable – compression – power – accuracy – consistency -
swing path )
5 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Body Friendly
There is no getting away from the fact the golfers sustain injuries – the most common being
lower back pain. Other common complaints include knee pain, shoulder pain, hip pain, elbow
pain and foot pain. Injuries for older players especially related to the joint and tendons can
also take longer to heal. It is always advisable that golfers stretch and warm up before
practicing or playing golf, but a swing model that is as body friendly as possible is advisable
for all golfers, especially as we get older.
Achievable
It will always be difficult to assume positions the younger more athletic golfers are able to
assume. A full 90 degree body turn, an upper torso would tightly against a firm and stable
based, or a swing driven by a very fast hip rotation simply my be too difficult to achieve, let
alone consistently replicate for aging golfers. Quite often a larger than desirable body shape
will make such things impossible. For and aging golfer a swing model must not only be
achievable but comfortable.
Compression
When you see great golfers play you will
rarely see two golfers with the same golf
swing. There will be features in common
but the differences can be quite extreme.
Jim Furyk’s backswing for example is
something unique to him. Swing planes,
takeaways, body shifts, follow throughs can
all vary considerably among professional
and low handicap golfers. There is however
one thing that they all have in common, and
it is the one thing that high handicappers
usually do not have. It is also something
that rarely comes naturally to anyone just
starting golf. And it’s something that a
golfer needs to learn early in the learning
process. Because without this one thing a
golfer will never be able to achieve that
effortless power the great golfers display
with swings that look so easy.
So what is this magic key – this most
essential of essentials?
At impact the hands are closer than
It is the ability to compress the ball at ball to the target at impact
impact where the hands are closer to the
target than the club head though the impact
zone.
6 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Power
While we all might want to hit the ball as long as professional golfers, most of us can never
expect to be able to do it, especially to older we get. Power when expressed in terms of
distance in golf swing is dependent upon a player’s strength and ability to generate club head
speed, a down and out inside swing path or line of attack at the golf ball, the ability to
compress the ball at impact and a full balanced follow through and finish. While we might
never have the strength to generate high club head speed that professionals do, we can have
the other aspects of the swing to ensure we are able to generate as much power as our body
shape, physical condition and athletic ability will allow.
Accuracy
Ask most golfers if they would rather be able to hit the ball very long but spend most of the
time off the fairway in the rough, or hit the ball much shorter but stay on the fairway, and they
will probably choose the latter option. Hit the ball straight and you will not only enjoy the game
more, but you will also have lower scores, lose less balls and have to waive less players
through while you search for your ball in rough.
Consistency
Even the greatest golfers of all time admit that they never play perfect shots all the time. They
do however consistently play their desired shots. Our swing should in this respect be as
reliable as we can make it. Much of this will depend hand eye co-ordination and practice, but
the swing model should also ensure the player can consistently hit the ball to the best of his
or her individual ability.
Swing Path
Most golfers have what is commonly referred to as an “over the top” or “out-to-in” swing path
which creates lacks of distance , and inevitably results in a big slice or a big hook to the left ,
which sends the ball further off target the longer the club. Ideally the golf swing should follow
an “in-to-out” path which enables the golfer to hit the ball long down the middle.
While all of the features above are desirable, there are 2 that are absolutely essential for
power, accuracy and consistency – and they are:
1. Being able to deliver the club on an ‘in-to-out” swing path
2. Being able to compress the ball at impact
Failure to achieve these to essentials are the major reasons high handicappers have
difficulty significantly lowering their scores.
7 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Stages of the
Golf Swing
The golf swing is usually defined in terms of various stages or components.
•The Grip
•The Stance
•The Takeaway
•The Backswing
•The Transition for Backswing to Downswing
•The Downswing
•The Impact Position
•The Follow Through
•The Finish
While all of these stages are important, the primary purpose of the first 7 stages is to
ensure solid compression of the ball at impact. Impact is the moment of truth.
The stages that follow Impact, the Follow Through and the Finish, have their primary
purpose in completing the dynamics of the Impact position and cannot be separated
from it.
Looked at this way the various stages or aspects of an ideal golf swing might be
described as
1. Providing an in-to-out swing path to ensure solid compression at impact
2.The ideal body alignment between hands, arms, and club shaft to ensure solid
compression at impact
3. An effective way of transition from backswing to downswing to ensure the club
is delivered on an in-to-out swing path and with ideal body alignments between
hands arms and club shaft to ensure solid impact compression
8 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

4. A consistent and effective backswing to the top to ensure the transition to downswing
on an in-to-out swing path can be made to ensure solid impact compression
5. A takeaway that enables this backswing position to be achieved
6. A stance and grip that ensures a correct and consistent takeaway, backswing,
transition to ensure an in-to-out swing path of the clubhead to the ball, compression of the
ball at impact, follow through and finish can be achieved.
7. A follow through from impact to ensure there is continuation of the club head down and
out through the ball
8. A balanced finish that results from the correct application of all the aspects that came
before.
Since the golf swing is such a dynamic series of movements, rather than examining it in the
usual nine stages – grip, stance, takeaway, backswing, transition, downswing, impact, follow
through and finish- we will look at it in 3 primary stages -
The Setup: Grip and Stance
The Back Swing: Takeaway and Backswing,
The Forward Swing: Transition, Downswing, Impact, Follow Though and Finish
9 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Setup – The Grip
Before we can learn how to swing the golf club we must first learn how to hold or
grip the golf club. The grip for the golfer is like the steering wheel, the accelerator and
the brakes would be to a car driver. It is fair to say the grip you take will affect how the
rest of your swing takes shape. This will become more obvious as the we consider
other aspects of the swing, but the grip should never be ignored or taken for granted.
Many golfers, once they have learned the grip, tend take it for granted and show little
concern for it anymore, but this can be a fatal error as many of the problems or barriers
a golfer faces come down to the grip. The grip should be constructed and checked
to ensure it is correct before every shot.
The way we use our hands are truly quite amazing. Human hands enable us to play
music, create art, construct buildings, write novels, play sports, thread needles,
perform surgery, juggle balls and a host of other things that make human beings
unique.
In golf the hands are the first form of contact with the club and play a crucial and
absolutely essential part in all parts of the golf swing. It is far to say that the hands are
the source of motion.
So much of the action that occurs in the swing we are learning revolves around
pressure points in the hands of an orthodox golf grip. When pressed or pushed in
particular ways the hands not only guide the swing but enable the ball to be
compressed at impact for strong, powerful, accurate shots.
If you ask someone who has never held a golf club to grip it, it is highly unlikely they
will grip it in what might be described as an orthodox golf grip. Most people would
normally grip it as they would a baseball bat, cricket bat or hockey stick, - in the palms
of their hands. The orthodox golf grip however is taken primarily in the fingers
and not the palms.
10 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Left Hand Placement
The grip of the club runs diagonally across the left hand from:
a) The crease in the palm between your little finger and heel pad of your hand (pressure point
number 2 in pic) to
b) the second knuckle joint of your index finger.
The club handle should protrude from the back of the left hand by about 1.5 to 2 centimeters
or about ¾ of an inch.
The fingers wrap around the grip and the handle wedges under the heal pad of the hand. This
enables you to freely uncock wrists to initiate the downswing described later.
11 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

When the left hand grip is taken, the left thumb is positioned on the top right hand side of
the grip, and there is a bend in the wrist so that the wrist can be positioned vertically on
top of the grip. (position marked X)
This is an extremely important alignment as it secures the club in the hand without needing to
hold the club with muscle tension, while at the same time aligning the leading edge of the
clubface to the wrist.
Right Hand Placement
The middle fingers wrap around the grip with the second knuckle joints of these fingers
positioned directly under the grip.
12 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The little finger of the right hand can either
a) Overlap the left index finger. (pictured below)
b) Interlock with the little finger of the left hand
c) Rest snug up against the little finger of the left hand (baseball grip)
The hollow of the palm of the right hand, along the lifeline is directly behind and over the left
thumb
The right thumb is positioned on the top left hand side of the grip.
The hollow of the palm along the lifeline of
the right hand sits on the left thumb at the
point marked X
13 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

When the grip is completed, from the golfer’s perspective, the right thumb is positioned on
the top left hand side of the grip.
When the stance is taken, the right hand on the grip will be a straight in line with the right
arm while the left hand is bent. Note that the right thumb is what is known as a short
thumb as opposed to a long thumb – meaning that the right thumb is not stretched along the
handle of the club. The right thumb is above the first finger or trigger finger.
The pad between the first and second knuckle joint of the right trigger finger sits firmly
behind the handle. Also be aware that unless you have very long fingers the tips of the right
trigger finger and thumb will not touch. There should be no gaps between the left and the
right hand.
14 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Setup – The Stance
To take the stance grip the club as described, and stand erect with the weight firmly
on the right foot while your left toes touching the ground to maintain your balance.
With the clubshaft parallel to the ground and the handle pointing to the center of the
hips, exert pressure by pushing the heal pad of the right hand down against the left
thumb. This will cause the elbows to point to the hip sockets. In this position your left
arm should be straight and your right arm bent slightly.
While still with the weight on the right leg, bend from the hip with you back straight, and
place the clubhead behind the ball. Place your left foot on the ground.
The knees should be slightly bent with the weight balanced evenly in both feet.
Your feet should be shoulder width apart and fanned to about 45 degrees. They should
feel heavy in the ground, evenly balanced with the feeling the your heals are coming
towards each other and your toward are going more out in the shoes. This gives you
the sensation that your feet are really locked into the ground.
Move your left hip ever so slightly to towards the target. When viewed from the front
the left leg will appear straighter than the right which will bend inwards slightly.
The straight spine will be tilted slightly to the right and the left shoulder will be
higher than the right.
It cannot be over emphasized that many of the problems that occur in the swing
emanate from an incorrect grip and stance. Never take them for granted. The world’s
top golfers are meticulous in getting the setup right, usually following a pre shot routine,
before hitting a shot.
There are 6 essential alignments in the grip and stance the golfer should be aware
of and replicate before every standard full swing.
15 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Setup Alignments
Alignment #1. The Left Wrist to the Club Shaft
When the left wrist is aligned to the club shaft you can
maintain an alignment between the left arm and club
shaft through the impact zone and into follow through. If
it is not in line everything else becomes a compensation.
Alignment #2. The Left Wrist to the Clubface
The left wrist should not be on a different angle to the
bottom leading edge of the clubface. When both
Alignmnents 1 and 2 are in place the hands are in line
with the club.
Alignment #3. The Club Shaft to the Body Center of
Gravity
When standing erect the club shaft should be parallel to
the ground and pointing to the center of the hips.
Alignment #4. The Elbows and the Hips
The elbows should be pointing down towards the hip
sockets. By pushing the hands together and down while
standing erect with the club still parallel to the ground,
the left arm becomes straight while the right arm
becomes slightly bent. Both elbows are pointing
downward toward the hip sockets.
Alignment #5. The Spine to the Ground
The straight spine in the address position should tilt
slightly to the right
Alignment #6. The Club face and Body to the Ball's
Target
The club face, shoulders, hips and feet at address
should be aligned and pointing to the ball's target.
NB. While there are 6 major alignments in the setup, there are 3 more that occur in the actual swing
16 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Begins
Underlying most good swings, is a very important alignment which occurs in the actual
swing.
Alignment # 6
For the golfer to build a consistent, repeatable swing, it is important that the
hands remain in front of the chest at all times throughout the swing.
Why is this so important? This alignment is very much a part of the geometry of
the swing. The golf swing is in effect the movement of the clubhead an inclined arc.
And this occurs around the turning body in a movement commonly referred to as the
pivot.
To understand why it is so important,
consider the sport of hammer throwing.
When the hammer thrower is revolving
at maximum speed the hammer is
directly in front of the chest.
This allows him or her not only to
generate maximum centrifugal force
and distance, but ensures a balance is
maintained while turning at very high
speed.
.
For the golfer, keeping that hands in front of the chest at all times in the swing serves a
similar purpose. It enables him or her to be in an ideal impact position to generate
maximum power at impact with balanced repeatable and consistent movements, without
making swing compensations.
17 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Test Alignment #6 for yourself
When you swing the golf club to the top of the backswing the body turns with it.
1. With preferably a wedge, 8 or 9 iron, take your grip and stance, and swing the club
to the top of the backswing, then hold your position.
2. Maintain the position of your arms in the backswing position, but move your hips
back to the starting position.
3. Then move your shoulders back to the starting position.
Position 1 Position 2 Position 3
If you have performed the backswing correctly your hands will be directly in front of
your chest. Many will find though that their hands are to the right of the center of the
chest - most commonly behind the right shoulder. From this position it will be difficult for
most people to consistently deliver the clubhead to the ball for power and/or accuracy
without making compensations that may be difficult to achieve and replicate.
18 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Why does this problem occur?
The failure to keep their hands in front of their body during the swing commonly occurs
when players pull their arms across their body during the backswing, or when
they start their takeaway with their hands and arms ahead of the body pivot.
A common takeaway for golfers to use is to cock their wrists at the start of the
backswing.
When this “wrist cock start” to the takeaway happens, two major problems often occur:
1. The start to the backswing gets too quick and out of cinque where the hands, arms,
and clubhead are at the top of the backswing (transition) well before the body loads
into position.
2. The clubhead gets too much to the inside from the start of the backswing, resulting
in the hands, arms and club coming in and across the chest. This makes it difficult to
swing the clubhead on the correct downswing path.
Another golfer may start the backswing by freely swinging his/her arms across
their body moments before the pivot of the body gets into motion.
This will also result in the hands, arms and club getting too deep behind the right
shoulder at the top of the backswing.
In this swing model the Takeaway and Backswing for the full swing are
designed to ensure the hands, arms, and club at the top of the backswing are in
front of the chest when the shoulders are at approximately 90 degrees to the
target line - an ideal position to start the club on the correct in-to-out
downswing path to ensure solid compression of the ball at impact.
To perform this takeaway and backswing correctly however it is essential the grip and
stance are correct. The stance because it is framework or structure around which the
swing is performed, and the grip because it drives the whole swing. Indeed a correct
grip in the is essential as the hands are the source of motion in this swing model,
and the pushing actions that occur to start the swing originate in pressure points of
both hands. If for example the grip is too much in the palms, rather than the fingers it
will be difficult to provide the correct pressure at the hand’s pressure points.
19 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Backswing
The swing starts with a forward press to kick start the swing. The forward press
is also a miniature impact position that displays or rehearses the body, arms, hands
and club head position at impact. The forward press is a technique employed by
many great golfers. The man with the longest recorded drive in a game of golf, Mike
Austen employed a forward press. The forward press once mastered can be quite
subtle and barely perceptible, but it is still a very effective way of firing the swing.
For the right handed golfer to start the forward press, a pressure point in the heal
pad of the flat right hand/wrist at address is “pushed” or “pressed” against the
bent left hand/wrist so the left hand wrist moves toward flat and the right hand/wrist
becomes bent. In this miniature impact position the hands are forward of the club
head and the club-shaft has a forward lean with the handle ahead of the club head.
.
The position of the hands at address and after the forward press
The greater pressure of the right hand over the left causes the hips to rotate
slightly forward and the shoulders to tilt with the left shoulder higher than the left.
It is this pivoting of the hips and shoulders that transport the hands, arms, and
club handle slightly forward.
20 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Takeaway
Following the forward press, the
backswing takeaway is initiated when
the left hand/wrist heal pad and second
knuckle joint of the left thumb are
“pushed” against the heal pad/upper
lifeline area of the bent right hand/wrist.
This will cause the left hand/wrist to
become bent as the right hand/wrist
moves towards flat. While the right hand
moves towards flat it still resists the
pressure of the left hand somewhat with
its own pressure.
From the golfers perspective the clubhead should move straight back along the target line
until about the point where the line of sight of the hands are covering the right foot.
It is also essential that the club head remains close to the ground and is not picked up.
Notice that from the start to the finish of the takeaway the hands remain in the yellow box as
they move straight back along the target line. They do not pick the club up and are not
pulled across the body.
21 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Alignment #7
The takeway sees the left knee move towards the
left toes (Alignment #7), while the right knee
remains flexed as it is at address and does not
straighten.
The left knee movement allows the golfer’s to
maintain the center of balance and prevents
putting stress on the knee
To learn how to correctly perform the
takeaway there is a drill called the Table
Edge Drill which it is advisable to understand
and practice to fully master the takeaway.
Table Edge Drill Part 1
Table Edge Drill Part 2
Table Edge Drill Part 3
End of the Takeaway with clubhead still
close to the ground
By the time the takeaway has been completed - the point where the line of sight of the hands
are covering the right foot – the hips will have completed their turn by about 45 degrees to
the target line. This is as far as the hips turn in the entire takeaway and the backswing that
follows.
VERY IMPORTANT:
The importance of getting the takeaway right must not be under estimated. Unless this
is done correctly there is a strong possibility, as mentioned, that the hands will not
remain in the center of the body throughout the swing and the player will have trouble
consistently delivering the club on the desired downswing path without making
compensations.
22 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Creating a 2 Lever System in the Backswing
It is important to understand that the golf swing is a system of levers. The club shaft is
one lever and the left arm can add to the one lever of the club shaft. The 3 main level
systems the golfers commonly employ. For a golf swing to have significant power a
lever system of 2 or levers is required.
1 Lever System
It is virtually impossible in the full swing to
employ a 1 lever system as weight of the
swinging club will cause the wrist to bend
and create at least 1 more lever, however
a 1 lever system is commonly used in
short chip shots that don’t require power,
and where the forward swing commences
at the end of the takeaway before the full
backswing would start to occur.
2 Lever System
The 2 lever system is by far the most
common lever system used by
professional and low handicap golfers.
The straight left arm provides one
lever and the clubshaft, usually at an
angle of at least 90 degrees is the other
other. This is the system we will be
using in teaching of this swing.
23 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

3 Lever System
Two of the levers in this system rely on the golfer having a bent left arm at the end of
the back swing. One lever will be the left arm above the elbow, one below the
elbow while the third lever will be the clubshaft.
Even though there have been some great golfers who have used and continue to use
this system, it requires very good timing and co-ordination, beyond the ability of most
high handicappers, to hit consistent and powerful shots.
Many beginner and high handicap golfers nevertheless use a 3 lever system, either
because they are unable to straighten their left arm to employ a 2 lever system, or
they are unaware of the benefits the 2 lever system offers over the 3 lever system.
The 3 leverage system when employed by beginner and high handicap golfers will
more than likely result in over the top shots with big slices and poor distance.
The great Harry Vardon, who invented the modern golf grip, employed
a 3 lever system. Note the bend between the upper arm and forearm.
24 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Backswing to the Top
When the takeaway is done correctly, the club head can ‘swing back’ to an ideal back
swing position. During the backswing the left arm rotates clockwise, while the right
hand life line area pushes against the left thumb, which in turn causes the right hand
to be pushed back. This will also cause the left arm to staighten and provide the
second lever for the 2 lever system we want. This action will also cause the left hand
to cup.
Aside from providing a second lever to generate power, the straight left arm at the
top of the swing will ensure a consistent swing arc, help the golfer to avoid
structural collapse and provide a feel for club head awareness.
It is important to understand that when the right hand is pushed backwards it will
assume a structure which is maintained into the impact position and beyond.
Because of its essential role at impact the right hand is only ever bent back. It
should never be ‘cocked up’, a mistake that is easy to make.
.
Right hand bent back, and left hand cupped, and straight left arm
at top of backswing
25 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Right Hand Bent Drill
To understand the 'feel' or pressure required to achieve the straight left arm and the
correct position at the top of the backswing, perform the 'right hand bent' drill
directly in front of the body, and rotate the body 90 degrees to assume the top of the
backswing position as described below.
1. Take your stance and straighten your left
arm in front of your body by pushing in the
direction of the right forearm. As you
straighten the left arm allow it to rotate
clockwise, and the left thumb to push the
right hand back (like a door opening to
about 45 degrees). Exert pressure from the
base of the thumb line in the right hand to
assist this. When complete your right arm
will be noticeably bent, and the back of the
left arm and hand will be facing the sky.
The left hand will be cupped and your
hands will be on a level not far above the
navel. The right arm will be bent.
2. Swing your arms into the backswing
.
position and take careful note of the
feel in you hands. Note also that the
left arm and cupped left arm are facing
the sky and the bent right elbow is
tucked into the right side of your body.
It is from this position that you will be ready to perform the transition from backswing
to the downswing using a “thumbs down” uncocking action.
26 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Downswing
The Transition from Backswing to Downswing
Undoubtedly the two greatest problems facing the beginner or high handicap golfer
are the ability to:
1. stop slicing the ball
2. compress the golf ball at impact
Most golfers have what is commonly referred to as an “over the top” or “out-to-in”
swing path which creates lacks of distance, and inevitably results in a big slice or a
big push to the left, and sends the ball further off target the longer the club. Ideally
the golf swing should follow an “in-to-out” path which enables the golfer to hit the
ball long down the middle.
The second main problem, the inability to compress the ball at impact where
the hands need to be ahead of the club head through the impact zone, is
the other main reason for a lack of distance.
Both of these problems commonly originate in the transition from the
backswing to downswing. When performed correctly the downswing will start
below the right forearm of the right handed golfer. Most high handicap golfers
however start the downswing path by swinging above the right forearm.
.
Swinging under the right forearm starts the swing on the correct “in-to-
out” swing path, while swinging above the right forearm starts the swing
path from “out-to-in”.
27 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

How do we learns to swing under the right forearm?
By ensuring the club shaft aligns with the left arm for delivery of the club head
down and out along the A to B line. (Alignment #9)
In making the Transition from Backswing to Downswing, a 'thumbs down' or
‘uncocking’ action with the clubshaft aligned with the left arm will start the club head on
an ideal in-to-outswing path along what is referred to as the A to B line with
A being the clubhead at the top of the backswing, and B being the ball
The A to B line is a line at angle across the target line.
Neutral
.
.
Uncocked
‘Thumbs Down’
The A to B Line runs from the club head at the top of
the back swing to the ball
Cocked
28 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

To hit the ball straight towards the target the golfer will have to aim across the target
line and let the pivot or body turn return the clubhead facing the target line. This is
not something that a person hitting a golf ball without instruction would normally do.
Most untutored golfers would try
to hit straight down the target
line and in the process perform
an over the right arm out-to-in
swing, which would either cause
the ball to slice badly to the
right, or be pulled to the left.
It is important to remember that
golf is a 2 target game. While
one target is the hole, the target
where the golfer initially needs
to aim for solid compression is
the ball via the A to B line or
the Hit Line.
Why does the “thumbs down” uncocking of the hands action works to align the club
shaft to the left arm and deliver the club head on an in-to-out swing via the A to B line
for solid compression of the ball?
To gain a thorough understanding of what happens to your hands and the club when you
perform the “thumbs down” uncocking of the hands action, hold your club in the correct grip
parallel to the ground about mid chest. Push your thumbs down and see how the club not
only aligns with the left arm, but drops to the right of the center line while the right hand
bends back and the left hand straightens.
.
Click for video
If you lower the club to the ground you will notice that your hands arms and clubface are in a
perfect impact position with the straight left arm and club shaft in line and the hands ahead of
where the ball would be. This shows that by starting the downswing with the ‘thumbs down’
action the impact position of the hand and arms and clubhead can be effectively set in place at
the start of the downswing.
Click for video of the uncocking or thumbs down A to B full swing transition drill
29 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

How the swing unfolds
The ‘thumbs down’ action to start the downswing will straighten the left leg allowing
the left hip to clear, cause the left shoulder to raise as it points along the A to B line,
and position the bent right arm on the right side of the torso in preparation for a
powerful extended hit through impact.
While the hip turn may give the impression that it is starting the downswing this is
merely an illusion. It starts with the uncocking ‘thumbs down’ action of the hands. In
fact the harder you attempt to hit the ball with the ‘thumbs down’ action, the faster the
hips will clear.
The straight left arm at the top of the backswing operates as a primary lever, so it
important that it is maintained all though the forward swing until at least chest height on
the follow through before the arms start to fold over the left shoulder at the finish of the
swing.
The side of the uncocked left hand that starts the forward swing leads the way
towards the ball, until just before impact when left arm rotates with the pivot so that the
back of the straight left hand is facing then the target. This occurs very quickly and it is
something you don’t really think about in the course of the swing.
The action of the left hand however during the entire forward swing is very much like
a left back hand cross court top spin tennis shot which continues through impact to
follow through.
The right hand maintains it’s bent position all the way during the downswing to impact
and beyond. This enables it to exert a very forceful pushing action down and out into
the ball at impact. In the course of the downswing the right arm will go from bent to
straight as it pushes the clubhead via the right hand down and out along the A to B line
through the impact position.
.
During he downswing to impact you will have the sensation of being pushed up a little.
If you don’t have this sensation you may not have performed the “thumbs down’
uncocking action sufficiently or correctly.
.
At impact the hands should be just ahead of the ball with the club shaft and left arm
forming a straight line. To ensure the golfer is able to compress the ball, it is essential
that the right hand is bent and the back of the uncocked left hand is flat at impact
and beyond. With an iron shot, the ball is effectively compressed into the ground by the
pushing action of the right hand, with both hands ahead of the ball at impact. At the
point of impact the right arm will still be slightly bent and will only completely
straighten after impact. The left shoulder will be higher than the right pointing towards
the target, while the left hip will have fully cleared on about a 45 degree angle to the
target line. This hip clearing though will have occurred when the right hand is bent back
during the backswing.
30 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

After impact both arms will be straight which allows the golfer to fully extend through
the ball. The right hand will still remain bent and the left hand remain uncocked until
the arms bend at the finish of the swing. Also the left hand and arm will continue to
rotate after impact into the follow through as the pivot of the body during the swing
transports the hands through the follow through and into the finish.
The right hand however will still remain bent, and the hands will be in the center of
the body.
The arms will also be well extended well into the follow through with the club shaft
close to parallel to the ground at chest level before the arms start to fold towards the
finish. The longer the golfer can maintain the uncocked ‘thumbs down” attitude into the
follow through, the longer the extension.
At the finish the club will more than likely recoil from the over the shoulder position
back in front of the golfer.
Once the arms have recoiled in front of the trunk of the body, the palm of the left hand
should be facing upward. This position of the left hand is often referred to as 'Catching
Rain'.
More on how the hands drive the swing
The pressure of the left hand against the right in the takeaway will cause the left
shoulder and the left leg to move. To ensure a stable base and avoid the body swaying
to the right, the left knee should move out in the direction of the left toes.
The “thumbs down” uncocking action to start the
downswing when performed correctly will assist in causing The Hands
the left leg to straighten while the right leg remains
flexed. In reality the left leg will start to straighten when are the
the right hand is bent back in the backswing. This is what
.
causes the hips to start to move before the backswing is Source of
completed, something that is apparent when the swing is
viewed in slow motion. The bending back of the right hand Motion
in the backswing also causes the left hip to clear, the
right elbow to tuck into the side of the body, and the left
shoulder to rise.
Keeping the uncocked ‘thumbs down’ attitude for as long as possible in the swing will
then cause the right shoulder to rise and lengthen the rotation of the swing
The following videos explain the working of the left and right hands through
the entire swing.
Left Hand Video 1 Video 2 Video 3 Right Hand Video 1 Video 2
31 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The body pivot works as the central core of the golf swing. This swing is very much a
rotational swing as though ‘turning in a barrel’. There is no hip slide for example, or
prominent weight transfer onto the right foot in backswing as you might find in other
swing models.
The pivot from the start of the swing to the top of the backswing will centered around
the central core of the body
Towards the end of the Impact Zone the weight will have transferred primarily to the
left leg and remain primarily on the left leg and foot through follow-through to a
balanced finish, at which time the left and right knees will be touching.
The pivot drill
Place your hands on your shoulders, left hand on the right shoulder and left shoulder
on the right and take the golf stance, making sure it is exactly as described in the
Setup
The Forward Press
(A Miniature Impact Position)
With your right leg remaining flexed, straighten your left leg slightly. Allow your left
hip to move back and clear and your left shoulder to rise in the direction of the
target line. This setup can be practised against a flat vertical surface such as post or
door, with your left ankle and left hip touching the post or doorway and your spine tilted
to the right.
The Backswing
.
Turn your shoulders approximately 90 degrees. Start this turn with the left shoulder.
During the turn:
There will be an equal balance of weight in your feet, both set firmly on the ground.
.
Your shoulders remain at an angle of 90 degrees to the spine, and most importantly,
they should not dip. At the completion of the turn the chin will be touching the left
shoulder.
Your left knee will move towards your left toes. Your right knee will remain flexed at at
address.
Your right hip will have turned approximately 45 degrees.
32 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Body Pivot
The body pivot works as the central core of the golf swing. This swing is very much a
rotational swing as though ‘turning in a barrel’. There is no hip slide for example, or
prominent weight transfer onto the right foot in backswing as you might find in other
swing models.
The pivot from the start of the swing to the top of the backswing will centered around
the central core of the body
Towards the end of the Impact Zone the weight will have transferred primarily to the
left leg and remain primarily on the left leg and foot through follow-through to a
balanced finish, at which time the left and right knees will be touching.
The pivot drill
Place your hands on your shoulders, left hand on the right shoulder and left shoulder
on the right and take the golf stance, making sure it is exactly as described in the
Setup
The Forward Press
(A Miniature Impact Position)
With your right leg remaining flexed, straighten your left leg slightly. Allow your left
hip to move back and clear and your left shoulder to rise in the direction of the
target line. This setup can be practised against a flat vertical surface such as post or
door, with your left ankle and left hip touching the post or doorway and your spine tilted
to the right.
The Backswing
.
Turn your shoulders approximately 90 degrees. Start this turn with the left shoulder.
During the turn:
There will be an equal balance of weight in your feet, both set firmly on the ground.
.
Your shoulders remain at an angle of 90 degrees to the spine, and most importantly,
they should not dip. At the completion of the turn the chin will be touching the left
shoulder.
Your left knee will move towards your left toes. Your right knee will remain flexed at at
address.
Your right hip will have turned approximately 45 degrees.
33 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Downswing
During the turn:
Your left leg straightens while your right leg remains flexed
Your left hip clears and to about an angle of 45 degrees to the target line
Your left shoulder rises and points in the direction of the A to B line at an angle to the
target line.
At the impact position the left shoulder will still be higher than the right but facing the
target line, the right leg will be bending slightly towards the straight left leg, and the
weight in the feet will still be evenly balanced
After the impact position the weight will move to the straight left leg as the right
shoulder rises.
Well into the follow though and into the finish, the right knee touches the right knee, the
right shoulder is close to level with the left shoulder and the torso faces just left of the
target.
At the finish of the swing the body is balanced over the straight left leg. Only the toes of
the right foot will be touching the ground.
.
.
34 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Shoulders
It is very important at this point to understand the position of the shoulder at impact in
the chip, pitch and full swing.
The left or lead should shoulder be higher than the right, and they should be in line with
the target line.
If they are to the left of the target line it is usually a good indication that the golfer is
hitting 'over the top', which would usually cause the ball to be pulled to the left or sliced
to the left.
Shoulder Check Test
1. Take your set up without a ball.
2. Swing the club back and through but stop at the impact position.
At impact the shoulder should be pointing to the target with the left shoulder higher
than the right.
If at impact shoulders are pointing to the left of the target line, there is a good chance
the you will have made an over-the-top swing – something you want to avoid.
.
.
35 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Address
The club is gripped with an orthodox
finger grip with the hands in the center
of the body.
The left shoulder is higher than the
right with the spine tilted slightly away
from the target.
The left side of the body is straighter
than the right with the right leg bent in
a little.
Weight is balance evenly on both feet.
.
The left arm is straight and the right
arm bent with both elbows pointing to
the hip sockets.
36 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Forward Press
For most advanced golfers the forward press is barely perceptible.
Nevertheless the lifeline of the right hand presses against the left thumb to push the
hands slightly forward of the ball.
The left leg straightens a little and the left hip moves back while the right should tilts
up along the target line.
Apart from kick starting the swing, the forward press replicates a miniature impact
position.
.
37 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
The Takeaway
Pressure from the left heal pad
against a resisting right hand lifeline
area causes left shoulder and arm
and clubhead to move and start the
takeaway along the target line.
The right knee starts to move towards
the big toe as the right hip starts to
turn.
There is no attempt to lift the
clubhead off the ground.
.
The hands are in the center of the
chest where they must remain all
through the swing.
38 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Takeaway Continues
The clubhead is still close to the
ground and no attempt has been made
to pick up the club or cock the wrists.
The takeaway will finish when, from
the golfers perspective, the hands will
be covering the right foot.
.
39 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
The Backswing Begins
The hips have turned a full 45 degrees
and the arms are well extended with no
attempt at this stage to cock
the wrists up.
The left arm is starting to rotate
clockwise as the weight of the club head
and momentum of the swing is bending
back the right hand.
The shoulders are turning flat as
opposed to the left shoulder being higher
than the right.
. .
40 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Backswing Almost Complete
The momentum of the swinging club
and the pressure it experts on the life
line of the right hand is increasing the
bend in the right hand and causing the
left hand cup and to cock, as the
clubshaft moves to wards a 90 degree
angle with the straight left arm.
.
41 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Top of Backswing
(Start of Transition into Downswing)
The momentum of the swinging club
completes the backswing where the
club is at least 90 degrees to the left
arm.
The clubhead has fanned open and
the top of the right arm is close to the
side of the torso.
During this transition stage between
backswing and swing, when viewed in
slow motion, the forward swing may
.
appear to begin before the backswing
has completed.
42 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Downswing
The ‘thumbs down’ or uncocking action
starts the forward swing with very
powerful force, as evident by the
bending club at 90 degrees to the
straight left arm parallel to the ground.
At this stage the left knee will start to
straighten and the left hip to clear.
Strange as it may seem the faster you
through the club head at the ball along
the A to B line the more the lag will
.
increase as the club head tries to
catch up with the hands.
43 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Downswing with Hands at Hip Level
The left leg has straightened and the
left hip cleared as the lag in the club
formed a the top of the backswing is
maintained.
The bent right arm is close to the right
side of the body and the shoulders
pointing along the A to B line.
Despite the fact that the right knee
has moved closer towards the target
. line, the weight is still evenly balanced
on both feet.
44 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Downswing Approaching Impact
Right arm is beginning to straighten as
it exerts pushing pressure along the A
to B line towards the ball.
At his stage the club head is traveling
very fast as the bent right hand pushes
the clubhead towards the ball.
.
45 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Impact
(The Moment of Truth)
The clubhead at impact compresses
the ball against the ground for
powerfully hit iron shot.
The club shaft and left arm are in line,
the right arm is almost full extended,
the left leg straight, the left hip cleared,
and the left shoulder raised and
pointed in the direction of the target
line.
.
The weight is still evenly balance on
both feet although the weight on the
right foot it is predominantly on the
inside.
46 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Post Impact
The right arm has fully straightened
while the club shaft is aligned with the
straight left arm.
The extended right and left arms form
a V shape in front of the chest which
will continue to the completion of the
follow through.
The weight has transfer almost
completely to the straight left leg which
now. serves as the center of the pivot
for the rest of the swing.
47 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
The Follow Through
Both arms are fully extended with the
weight on the left foot.
The front of the body is still slightly to
the right of the target line. The
clubhead too is still to the right of the
target line, but the club head is
pointing to the sky as a result of the
rotating left arm and hand.
The right hand is still bent.
.
48 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Follow Through Continuation
With the hands level with the neck the
arms still haven’t started to fold as the
swing is pushed through to the finish.
Note that the hands have not been
swung across the body but remain in
front of the chest.
.
49 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
Close to the Finish
Both arms begin to fold over the left
shoulder to complete the finish.
The shoulders are level and there is
no pressure on the back.
.
51 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
The Finish
The arms have folded completely
over the left shoulder with the chest
pointing left of the target line in a
well balanced finish.
The left and right knees are
touching.
.
52 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Swing Sequence
The Finish Recoil
The momentum of the swing will
cause the club to recoil back in front
of the balance body.
The right hand will still be bent and
the palm of the left hand facing the
sky. ‘Catching the Rain’.
.
53 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Chip Shot
and why it is so important to learn
Despite the desire of most people to want to learn the full swing straight away, it is
generally advisable to learn it in incremental steps. Hopefully by now you have a
thorough understanding of the full swing and why its various aspects are so important if it
is to work effectively, but putting it into practice takes time and effort. Initially you will find it
hard to consistently time the ball or even remember what you are supposed to be doing
as you swing the club. That’s why drilling in the various aspects of the swing is so
important. Equating learning the golf swing with a musical instrument such as a guitar, the
learning process is gradual. To learn the guitar chords you not only have to know the
chords but spend hours trying to smoothly change from one chord..
For this reason it is advisable to learn the full swing by starting with a miniature version of
the swing, the Chip Shot.
The advantages of learning the Chip Shot are:
1. The chip shot is easier to learn than the full swing, but once learnt makes learning the
full swing a lot easier.
2. The full swing pivot is an extension of the chip pivot.
3. The backswing of the full swing is an extension of the chip swing takeaway.
4. It is with the chip shot that you are able to more easily implement the “thumb down”
uncocking action and hit along the A to B Line.
5.The chip shot enables you to consistently feel what it is like to compress the ball a
impact.
6. The chip shot ‘finish’ teaches you how your left arm must be aligned in a straight line
with the club shaft at impact, with your shoulders pointing in the direction of the target with
your left shoulder tilted higher than the right.
7. The chip shot teaches you timing and rhythm.
.
Even without its benefit in learning the full swing, the Chip Shot in in itself is an essential
shot around the green, and something that you should master to reduce your scoring
when playing on the course.
54 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1) For the chip shot stance the weight is about 60/40 on the left foot, with the hands slightly
ahead of the ball. (2) Following the forward press the pressure point and the base of the thumb of
the left hand is pushed back against the right hand pressure point at the base of the life line to start
the takeaway straight back along the target line without any attempt to pick the club head off the
ground. (3) Before the hands start to hinge (4) the thumbs down uncocking action starts the
transition from take way to forwards swing, sets the hands behind the target line, causes the left
leg to straighten and the left hip to clear.
(5) (6) (7) (8)
(5) The club continues on the A to B line towards the ball with the hands well ahead of the club
head. (6) At impact the hands are covering the left leg still well ahead of the ball. (7) The thumbs
down uncocking action ensures the club shaft is aligned with the left arm. On a short chip shot this
is where the shot would finish. (8) Well past the left leg and the thumbs down uncocking action is
still evident with the left arm maintaining the left arm club shaft alignment as the club head pushes
through the ball. The shoulders are noticeably tilted with the left shoulder higher than the right, as
they point along the target line.
View Video of Chip Shot
Chip Transition from Takeaway to Forward Swing
55 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

The Pitch Shot
The Miniature Full Swing
Once the Chip Shot has been understood, drilled in a practiced to the point where you are
able to consistent compress the ball and hit accurate shots, you will be in a position to
extend the shot into a Pitch Shot, a shorter version of the full swing.
Unlike the full swing, which is designed to produce power, the Pitch Shot is played from
short distances to the green. The with the Pitch Shot intension is to land the ball as close
to the hole as possible, with backspin to prevent the ball running through the green.
In the Pitch Shot, once the takeaway has been completed, the left hand and arm rotate
clockwise, while the momentum of the swinging club and pressure from the heal pad of
the left thumb pushes against the lifeline area of the right hand, to push it back. While this
is happening the left hand is cocked up and wound into the right hand slightly. At the end
of the backswing, which in a pitch usually finishes when the hands are at about level with
the top of the pelvic bone, the bent back right hand will cause the left leg to straighten
and the left leg to clear, before the forward swing begins.
The transition will then occur with the same thumbs down or uncocking action explained
in the Chip Shot, assisted by the weight of the club head and the force of gravity, which
lets the club head almost fall under the right arm in line with the left arm. This
enables the club head to be delivered along the A to B line for and in-to- out swing.
Pitch Shot Transistion from Backswing to Forwards Swing Part 1 / Part 2
Once the impact position described in the chip shot
has been reached, with the left arm aligned with the
club, the rotating left hand and the pivot will
continue the swing with the arms extended to about
chest level where the swing will finish.
Most importantly the hands never ‘flip’ across
the body and the hands always remain in front of
the body.
.
The right hand will always remain bent.
56 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
As with the chip shot, the pitch shot stance has the weight is about 60/40 on the left foot, with the
hands slightly ahead of the ball. (1) The takeaway is the same as the chip, straight back along the
target line. but the (2) wrists are allowed to hinge in the backswing (3), before the thumbs down
uncocking transition (4) delivers the club head along the A to B line to impact, (5) where the
hands are well ahead of the ball and the left arm and club shaft are in line. Immediately the lofted
pitching wedge compresses the ball into the air.
(6) (7) (8)
After impact the alignment between the left arm and club shaft continue by keep the thumbs down
action (6), with the arms still extended (7) mid chest level. The finish occurs about shoulder level
(8).
Pitch Shot Video
57 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

Becoming Your Own Best Teacher
Much of this publication has been devoted to why it is important to do certain things in the
swing and not others. Without understanding why we are really floundering in the dark. To
master the golf swing it important that we are able to look at ourselves objectively and truly
understand the laws of cause and effect. Only then will be able to advance in our attempts to
develop a sound golf swing. It is then that we can become our own best teacher.
As a golfer we experience the sensation of hitting a golf ball, but our perception is of course
very different from someone observing our swing. Golf teachers and coaches can not only
observe our swing, but with their knowledge of the swing, help us improve. Ultimately though
this relies on accepting that we are doing what they are telling us we are doing. Fortunately
today we have sophisticated cameras built into our everyday devices like mobile phones . It is
easy for us to view our own swing for ourselves so that we can see that what we are doing is
often not what we thought we were doing. There also computer programs like the V1 Digital
Coaching System with which we are able to draw guide lines on videos and stop, start and use
slow motion to further analyze our swings.
Such modern technology can be of great assistance to complement our development, and with
the correct usage and understanding make the learning process a lot quicker.
It is advisable however to supplement your self learning with the assistance of a trained golf
teaching professional. Once you have learnt the grip and stance for example, you cannot
expect to get it exactly right straight away, and if per chance you do, you need a teaching
professional to assure you it is right. You will need coaching and correction all the way through
the learning process. If you think you can get by without professional guidance just remember
that the greatest players in the world all have coaches who teach, guide and check their
swings continually.
Another important learning channel that has come with the advent of the computer is the
development of teaching forums and online lessons. Such forums are a great way to have
access to a teacher if you live too far away to have personal lessons and instruction. The
Croker Golf System Master Teaching Academy is such an example, where for a monthly fee
you have access to a full range of teaching videos, weekly Q&A sessions, and online video
swing assessments.
One thing you should be careful of when learning the swing is to get too caught up in the many
various tips you find can online. It has been mentioned before that no matter what swing
model you choose to follow, stick with that model to the exclusion of others. If you don’t like
that model it is always best to stop completely and commit to another model rather than trying
to integrate parts of one model with another. Similarly you must choose a teaching
.
professional who understands and is capable of teaching the model you are wanting to be
taught. Either that or go with the model they want to teach and take time to understand why
they are teaching that model. But most importantly you both must be on the same page. That
you will have the best chance of developing a sound swing that will really enable you to
experience the great game of golf and really enjoy the hit!
58 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents

There are as many golf swings as there are golfers, and a mighty number of them successful
at a hitting a ball squarely, solidly in the right direction, with adequate power. Our swings are
as unique to us as our thumbprint. We swing according to our stature, with a speed our
muscles and sinews allow, and generally speaking we are stuck with that. Yet we can improve
our striking technique, improve results, and get better scores with sensible guidance such as
Peter Croker presents in this book. Croker has been a keen analyst of technique for many
years, collecting data, impressions and images as he went. No one asked more questions of
the game’s finest players or delved deeper into the thought behind the successful. In
professional golf there are both players, and teachers, sometimes indistinguishable. Some
progress from one to the other as Peter Croker has done, combining his own personal
experiences in the grand battle with the top courses, and his time spent instructing beginners
and good players alike. This seems to me a priceless apprenticeship for the role of
professor/lecturer/writer on the game of golf and the way it is played.
Peter Thomson
5 Times Winner of the British Open
I first met Peter Croker over 20 years ago at a coaching seminar he hosted for the Southern
California PGA. During that seminar, I immediately knew he had a more refined way of
educating professionals and amateurs about the skills necessary to build an enjoyable golf
game. His passion for the game showed in the careful words he used to explain how to train a
player around solid, reliable swing mechanics. Over the years, I’ve enjoyed my friendship with
Peter. I include him as one of my Coaching Mentors and I’m better for knowing him. He’s a
classy gentleman who cares for others and still lights up when we talk about golf.
Martin Chuck
Revolution Golf Senior Instructor
PGA Tour Striker Training Products
Tour Striker Golf Academy
Please accept this as an endorsement of Peter Croker as one of the most effective and
committed golf instructors I have come to know in my 46 years as a PGA golf
professional. Peter has done the research – and his background as a tournament player gives
him a special understanding of both the mechanics of the swing and the ability to perform on
the course. Peter was willing to challenge standard beliefs to uncover a system that allows all
level of players the opportunity to make more consistent ball contact sooner than they
expect. Peter’s commitment to helping people play better golf – and his desire to share his
experience with his fellow professionals steps him apart in our profession.Those fortunate
enough to spend time with Peter – or adopting his system – will be better players sooner.
.
John Kennedy
National PGA Awards
2017 Bill Strausbaugh Award
2012 Patriot Award
2010 Horton Smith Award
59 Learning the Golf Swing - Contents