First
swing
golFer’s guidethe pga oF america
Table of Contents
1CHAPTER
Welcome to Golf - 3
2CHAPTER
Facility Orientation - 9
3CHAPTER
Beginning to Play the Game - 13
4CHAPTER
The Skills of Golf - 21
5CHAPTER
Ball Flight Laws - 31
6CHAPTER
Skill Practice - 35
7CHAPTER
Testing Your Skills - 47
8CHAPTER
Rules of the Game - 51
GLOSSARY  - 57
1FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE

Welcome to Golf1CHAPTER
3FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE

4THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 1
5FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEWELCOmE TO GOLF
Dear Golfer
No experience in the world quite equals the exhilaration you feel when you 
hit a golf ball. Whether you’re hitting from the tee, the fairway, the rough 
or a bunker – when you strike the ball and it goes airborne – it’s the greatest feeling in the world.  
Golf is a game that you will be able to play and enjoy throughout your life-
time. Rich in tradition and history, few sports have a heritage, like golf, that can be traced back hundreds of years.
Remember, there is more to the game than just hitting the ball. Learning how to hit the ball in the 
variety of situations you will face is a skill that can be developed, but it requires practice. Learning how to play the game, the on-course etiquette that is an important part of the game, and knowing the Rules of the game also require practice and understanding.
That’s why your best source of knowledge on the game and how to play it is your PGA Professional. 
Tour professionals, like myself, rely on our instructors to keep us competitive and our games in tune. So should you. Your game will improve faster and you will really enjoy your time on the course.
Hal Sutton
Dear Golfer
Golf is a challenging and exciting game.  The object of moving the ball 
from a starting point (the teeing ground) to an end point (in the hole) seems 
simple.  But the task of propelling the ball can be complex.  The game not only requires that you attempt to master the multiple skills of golf, but you must also gain knowledge and understanding about how to play the game.
While the game has evolved, the Rules and general nature of the game 
remain unspoiled and we continue to enjoy many of the early elements of the game. Some of us play golf as a profession. Most golfers play the game for fun. However, unlike other sports, golfers at all levels can share the same playing fields, Rules and equipment with the most talented players in the world.
 Remember that instruction is the backbone of the game. Even the greatest players in the world go 
back to their teaching professionals for a check-up on their fundamentals. Which is why seeing your PGA Professional on a regular basis will help you get the most out of your game.
Annika Sorenstam

7FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEWELCOmE TO GOLF
6THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 1
Most historians agree that the Dutch appear to have 
the earliest ties to the game of golf.  Thirteenth century 
Dutch literature contains references to “golf-like” games with medieval names like “spel mitten colve” (play with club) and “den bal mitta calven to slaen” (to hit ball with the club).  Dutch master painters have depicted more than 450 paintings and drawings of subjects participating in a game similar to what we now know as the game of golf.
The game as we know it today began around 1744 
in St. Andrews, Scotland.  Golf in the United States began in 1888 with the establishment of the first official registered club, the Golf Club of America, in Yonkers, N.Y.  Golf, once a game of noblemen and kings, is now played by people of all ages.  Today golf is played around the world and has numerous levels of competition.  Anyone – men, women, young or old, amateur or professional, the physically challenged – can enjoy the game of golf.  Golf is a sport where you don’t have to be big, strong or fast to be successful. Golf is a game where the traits of successful players are: patience, persistence, skilled practice and focused ability.  Whether you play for fun or play competitively, golf is a complex game.  To reach your fullest potential, ongoing practice and professional instruction is needed.
History of Golf
Competitive golf is played by professionals and  
amateurs.  Amateur events are sponsored for men and women of every age.  The major professional championships for men are the Masters, the United States Open, the British Open and the PGA Championship.  In addition, the PGA Tour sponsors a full calendar of events.  The Ladies Professional Golf Association (LPGA) sponsors a similar tour for women.  Their major championships are the McDonald’s LPGA Championship, the United States Open, the Weetabix Women’s British Open and the Kraft Nabisco Championship.  Professional stroke-play tournaments consist of a designated series of rounds with the winner being the player with the lowest total score.
Competitive GolfA golf course is different from other sport playing   
 fields.  Basketball courts and soccer fields are  
similar from arena to arena, yet every golf course has a different layout.  A regulation golf course consists of 18 different holes.  
Golf holes, however, do have common characteristics.  
Every hole starts from a teeing ground (mounded area where play begins) and ends at a putting green (a closely mowed surface) where the cup and flagstick are found.  The area between the teeing ground and putting green is called through the green.  Through the green  consists of the whole area of the course except the teeing ground and the putting green of the hole being played and all hazards on the course.  Holes range from less than 100 yards to more than 600 yards.  Each hole may have obstacles and hazards (trees, water, bunkers).
At the beginning of play, each 
player should pick up a scorecard that provides information about each hole’s yardage and par.  Par is the score set for a hole that represents a standard of excellence that golfers attempt to meet.  Par is determined by the yardage on each specific hole.  The USGA has set the following guidelines for computing par (please note chart): Par Men WoMen
   3 Up to 250 Up to 210
   4 251 to 470 211 to 400
   5 471 to 690 401 to 590
   6 More than 690 More than 590
The United State Golf Association (USGA) governs 
the Rules of Golf and amateur status in the United States.  This organization has been the primary governing body for golf since 1894.  The USGA, in conjunction with The Royal & Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews, is responsible for establishing the rules of play.  The USGA conducts championships, maintains standards for equipment and provides a fair playing field for golfers of all levels through its handicap system.  The USGA Handicap System has made it possible for golfers of differing abilities to enjoy fair competition. Today, there are more than 5 million golfers who have established USGA Handicap Indexes.  On average the score for a 24 handicapper would be 96 on a Par 72 course.  A player can establish a handicap index by posting scores at a recognized USGA golf club.  The handicap can be established after five rounds are played and recorded.  The PGA of America, the PGA Tour and the LPGA govern professional golf.  
Governing Bodies of GolfToday in the U.S., 31.1 million participants play 
recreational golf.  Approximately 6.6 million golfers 
play more than 24 rounds of golf each year.  Play  may occur at private or public golf establishments.  Golf facilities can range from miniature golf courses, to Par-3 courses, to executive courses, to full 9- and 18-hole courses.  The minimum number of holes of a golf course is nine with the standard of play being set at 18 holes.  Reservations for play are required at many golf courses. It is suggested you call in advance to request a starting tee time. Recreational Golf
Golf Course Layout
2CHAPTER
9FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEFacility Orientation
There is more to playing golf than learning how to swing the club and keeping score. The game is 
based on long-held traditions of manners, respect for the course and a respect for other  
players / fellow competitors on the course.
8THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 1
Playing the game of golf has never been easier, or 
more fun. Whether you are just learning to play, look-
ing to improve your skills or looking for people to meet and events to play in, you will find it all at Play Golf America. Log onto www.playgolfamerica.com and find a PGA Professional or a golf program that’s right for you.Play Golf America
10THE PGA OF AmERiCAStarter - At the First TeeCHAPTER 2
Tee Times Policy
• How many days in advance
• Rates
• Cancellation policy
• Walk-on policy
• Single-player policy
• Golf car use policy (age requirements - rate)
• Walkers policy (time restrictions on walking)
Equipment Policy 
• Rental clubs availability 
• Rate 
• Reservations 
• Individual player bag / equipment policy dress Code
• Player requirement 
• Shirts – shorts/ slacks 
• Footwear requirements
Amenities Available
•	Food and beverage service 
•	Golf shop
•	Locker rooms 
• Caddies 
• Practice facilities
Directions and potential drive-time factor depending on 
your locale.Reservations - Call the Golf Course
Bag drop 
• Unload golf clubs 
• Park vehicle
Golf Shop 
• Check in 
• Pay your fees 
• Get a scorecard and any course information 
•  Acquire any equipment needs (clubs, balls, glove, etc.) meet Fellow Players
• Locate restroom and food and beverage facilities
Warm up
• Stretching routine 
• Practice facility and practice putting greenArrival - 40 to 45 minutes Prior to Your 
Starting Tee Time
• Course rules
• Information such as yardage plates
• Golf car rules 
• Course markings •  Suggestions for tee choice or length of course to 
match your skill level
•  Pace of play guidelines – keeping up with group in front of you.report to starting tee 10 minutes before your tee time to review the following:
11FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEFACiLiTY ORiEnTATiOn
Ranger
•  Player assistance controls the pace of play (always 
maintain correct spacing with the group in front and help keep pace for everyone’s enjoyment).On Course 
• Use continuous putting to speed up play
•  Repair all ball marks on the putting greens and replace or sand your divots
• Follow all golf car paths and signage accordingly 
• Mark your scorecard at the next teeing ground. during Play of the Round
Your instructor may have suggested a set of rules for your level of play and the course.
Having fun is the most important factor, especially when first learning to play. Be patient and enjoy the experience. 
Scoring is not always the objective in the beginning.it’s O.K. Rules
•  Return the golf car to the attendant if you ride 
during this round
•  Handle and put your clubs away in the vehicle
•  Post your score– follow U.S.G.A. Handicap Policy for posting•  Recap your round– enjoy the facilities with your group and plan your next round!Conclusion
Beginning to Play  
the Game3CHAPTER
13FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
15FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEBEGinninG TO PLAY THE GAmE
14THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 3
Golf, when compared to other sports, is very safe.  
However, golf injuries can and  
do occur.  
 
   One safety hazard in golf is the risk of being struck with a club by a fellow player.  The best rule to follow is to “Stop and Look” before you swing.  Make sure that your surroundings are clear and only swing when all is clear.  When others are playing make sure to stand quietly, either directly behind or to the side of the per-son playing a shot.  A second safety hazard in golf is the possibility of being struck with a golf ball.  Golf is a game where the furthest ball from the hole is played first.  When playing on the course make sure that you are positioned where the ball cannot strike you.  On occasion a player not in your group might hit an errant shot that lands close to you.  
Golf uses its own safety warning,  calling  “Fore,” to 
warn other golfers that a ball in flight has the potential for reaching another group.  
Lightning can pose another serious danger on the golf course.  Always move into a safe area when you see or hear thunder or lightning. Safety
The time it takes to play a round of golf depends on 
several conditions: the difficulty of the golf course, the number of players on the golf course and your skill level.  On average an 18-hole round of golf should be approximately four to four-and-a-half  hours.  This breaks down to about 15 minutes per hole.  To speed up play several strategies should be used:
1.   Be ready to play: Make sure you have tees, an extra ball, ball markers and a divot repair tool in your pocket during play.
2.   Limit your practice swings to one before it’s your turn to play.
3.   Watch your ball land and select a spot in the distance to use as a visual marker when looking for your ball.  Have others in your group watch each player’s shots.  This helps speed up the time to find a ball that is not in the fairway.4.   Search for a lost ball for 5 minutes or less.
5.   Carry your bag, roll your pull cart or park your golf car on the side of the putting green closest to the next hole.  When carrying a bag or pulling a cart always move your equipment forward to avoid walking back to get your clubs.  
6.   Putt out.  Play is faster if you finish putting rather than marking your ball on the putting green.
7.   Record your score on the next tee, not on the putting green.
8.   Keep up.  You are playing too slow if the group in front of you is one hole ahead.  
9.  Let faster groups play through.  Speed of PlayBehavior on the course has easy rules to follow. A 
code of etiquette was established when golf originated 
as a game.  According to the USGA the etiquette of golf is a series of suggestions that point out certain standards of behavior for play on the golf course.  A few rules of etiquette include:
1.  Safety first – Don’t play until others in front of you 
are out of range.
2.  A player who has the honor (low score from previous 
hole) should be allowed to play first from the teeing ground.
3.  Do not talk, move or stand directly behind someone 
when they are playing.4. Play without delay.
5.  Allow others to play through when searching for a 
lost ball. 
6.  Take care of the golf course and repair any divots 
that your club makes on the teeing ground, fairway and ball marks on the putting green.
7.  Before leaving a bunker, rake and smooth over all 
holes and footprints.  When finished, lay rake with teeth down.Golf Etiquette
17FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEBEGinninG TO PLAY THE GAmE
Approach shots are those shots that are played 
between the teeing ground and the putting green.  
Ideally, an approach shot is played from the fairway.   At times a golfer’s tee shot misses the fairway and the ball must be played from the rough or natural areas that line the fairway.
The ball furthest from the hole is the ball that is 
played first.  The order of play continues to the next closest ball and so on until play on the hole for everyone is completed.
Two factors contribute to successful 
approach shots:  distance and direction.  Depending on the flagstick location, a golfer will aim to a target on or near the putting green.  Distance is important for advancing the ball to the target.  What club should you hit?  Before you select a golf club, it is important to know the distance to the center of the putting green.  All golf courses provide a scorecard with hole yardages and some type of yardage markers, usu-ally found in the center of the fairway.  Typical marking locations are 200, 150 and 100 yards from the center of the putting green.  Before you play it is important to determine how far, on average, your ball travels. 
All golfers should be prepared to play ready golf!
Often a putting green will be surrounded by green-
side bunkers filled with sand or grass.  These bunkers 
are designed to catch errant shots or force players to hit shots that carry onto the putting green.  Several rules and etiquette need to be applied when a ball lands in the bunker.  A bunker is a hazard.  While in a hazard, a player is not allowed to ground his/her club (touch sand) before attempting to play the ball.  Each practice swing in a bunker that touches the sand would result in a 2-stroke penalty.  A player is not allowed to remove any loose impediments, such as: stones, leaves or twigs around a ball in the sand.  Once the ball has been cleared of the bunker, the sand should be smoothed or raked clean of footprints and divots.  The rakes are provided, usually on the golf car or on the ground just outside and near the bunkers.Approach Shots
16THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 3
Determine the tee markers appropriate for your skill 
level.  Golf courses use different colored tee markers to 
represent course yardage.  The forward tees are desig-nated for beginners and players with a high handicap.  The longest yardage tees are designated for low handi-cap or professional players.
Once you have selected the tees that you will be play-
ing and the starter has given you the go-ahead to begin play, determine who will play first.  And, “Play Away.”  The first player should tee his/her ball between or no further than two club lengths behind the tee markers.  
Determine the shape of the golf hole and aim toward a target in the fairway.  A helpful strategy is to tee your ball on the side of the tee box closest to any trouble such as water hazards, trees, or bunkers.  This allows you to have a wider target area and to hit away from the trouble.  Take no more than one practice swing, line up and play your ball, watch it land.  This will allow you to find your ball easily as you move from the tee to the fairway.
Once the hole has been completed, the order of play 
remains the same as on the first hole unless another player in the group earns a lower score.  This is called “having the honor.”  Honor establishes the order of play on each successive tee. First Tee
The Dye Course
PGA Golf Club, Port St. Lucie, FLGreen
TeeClosest  to
the Hole 
Plays Last
Plays Third
Plays 
Second
Farthest from
the Hole
Plays FirstBunker Play
19FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEBEGinninG TO PLAY THE GAmE
The objective of golf is to play the ball from the tee-
ing ground to the putting green and into the hole in 
the fewest strokes possible.  You should count every swing, including penalty strokes and misses (whiffs). Your score for the hole is the total number of strokes you play from the tee until the ball is holed.  The scorecard lists each hole and a score listed that is con-sidered par.  Although beginners may score higher than par, par is a standard to help measure your skill while playing on the golf course.  Golfers use special terms for scoring a hole.  Finishing the hole with the same score as a par is called making par.  Scoring one stroke below par is a birdie and two strokes under par is an eagle.  Scoring one stroke over par is a bogey and two strokes over par is a double bogey. 
Recording Your Score
18THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 3
Play on the putting green begins with the player 
furthest from the hole.  Each player’s ball should be 
marked by a flat object such as a small coin or ball marker.   Care should be taken when on the putting green to avoid damage to the green’s surface.  
The putting green is an area where the ball should 
roll smoothly.  Avoid dragging your feet, place clubs and the flagstick down carefully, and stay clear of the hole when retrieving your ball from the hole.  Ball marks, or indentations that the ball makes when land-ing on the putting surface, should be repaired with a divot repair tool.  
The putting green also requires knowledge about 
putting green etiquette.  Long putts may require another player to tend (pull out) the flagstick once the ball has been putted.  Players should be aware of all balls and markers to avoid stepping on a player’s line of putt.  Be sure to stand far enough away from others so that your shadow does not interfere with another play-er’s line of putt.  When retrieving your ball from the hole, avoid stepping on or near the cup.  If extra clubs, for pitching or chipping, are carried to the green, make sure to place them gently on the apron (edge) of the green and on the side closest to the next hole.  Always check the surrounding area before leaving so that all extra clubs that have been carried there are collected.
Putting Green Play

20THE PGA OF AmERiCAThe Skills of Golf4CHAPTER
Target Side – Trail Side
In golf, we talk about the Target Side of the body, which is the side of the body closest to the target.   
The side away from the target is the Trail Side.
21FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidECHAPTER 3
Today a variety of golf equipment is available.  Most 
sets of clubs consist of woods and irons.  Woods origi-
nally were made of hardwoods like persimmon or wood laminates, hence the name.  Today woods are made primarily out of metal.  Woods number 1 through 11.  The 1-wood (driver) is almost exclusively used for playing off the teeing ground of par 4 and 5’s.  The 3- through 11-wood are used when a long shot is required from the fairway.  Iron clubs range in number from 1 to 9 plus a variety of wedges.  Lower number irons are used for long approach shots, the 5- 6- and 7-irons are considered middle irons and the 8- and 9-irons, as well as the wedges, are considered short irons.  Putters, sold separate from sets, come in all shapes and sizes.  Putter selection is often based on personal preference.  Using a PGA Professional who has the ability to fit clubs is the ideal way to purchase clubs. A player should try all equipment before a purchase is made.  In accordance with the Rules of Golf, up to 14 golf clubs may be car-ried.  Beginners often carry beginner sets that include a driver and 3-wood, a 5-, 7- and 9- iron, a pitching wedge, a sand wedge and a putter.  Golfers can config-ure a full set in any way they choose as long as no more than 14 clubs are in the bag.
Equipment
driver 5 Wood
5 iron 9 iron
23FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidETHE SKiLLS OF GOLF
Golf Swing mechanics
22THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 4
Golf Swing
Setting an imaginary target line Setting your grip
Aiming the clubface
Posture
To position the upper body correctly you must have 
the proper stance as described above.
•  Push your hips back and tilt forward from your hips 
until the bottom of your sternum points at the ball.•  Tilt your spine away from the target so your trail shoulder is lower than your target shoulder. Address positionThe golf swing is just that, a swing.  In nearly all 
sports that involve swinging an implement, a bat, a 
hockey stick or racquet, the object to be struck is mov-ing.  In golf, the ball is always stationary.  The golf swing is similar to other swinging motions in sport.  For golf, you need to learn only one basic swing.  As distance requirements change a different club is selected from the set for the needed yardage. 
The golf swing is a circular motion around the body 
similar to a baseball swing.  The difference is that while a batted ball ideally is around waist high when it is struck, a golf ball is on the ground.  In a golf swing the plane that the club travels on is tilted.  The golf swing has two distinct phases – pre-swing 
and in-swing.  The pre-swing phase, the preparation that occurs before playing, includes a pre-shot routine and addressing the ball.  The in-swing phase is the actual swinging of the golf club.  The swing should be completed in one smooth, fluid motion.  The entire swing is often broken down into smaller components that include the: address, takeaway, change of direction, down swing, impact and follow through/finish.
Address Position
It is important that we have the 
proper stance to help create balance.  
It is vital that we maintain proper balance throughout the golf swing. 
•  Stand up to the ball with your ankle joints under your shoul-ders. 
•  The weight should be evenly distributed between the heels and the balls of the feet.  The weight is actually directly over the arches but since most arches don’t touch the ground you will feel it balanced between the balls of the feet and the heels. 
•  Your weight should be evenly balanced between the right and left foot.
1998 PGA Champion Vijay Singh 
demonstrates the swing at a PGA Past Champions Clinic
25FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
24CHAPTER 4 THE SKiLLS OF GOLF
Grip
The grip is one of the key fundamentals to a good 
golf game.  Without a proper grip it is very difficult to 
attain the most out of your golf game.  
•  While standing up straight, hold the club up in 
front of your body at a 45-degree angle with your trail hand on the shaft just above the grip.  
•  With your target hand, simply shake hands with the grip (placing grip of club diagonally across base of fingers).  •  Slide the trail hand down the shaft of the club so the target hand thumb fits into the lifeline of the trail hand.  At this point the target hand thumb is being covered up with the thumb pad of the trail hand.  
•  Pressure: Hold the golf club firmly, but do not squeeze.
Interlocking Grip Baseball Grip
XAlignment - Clubface & Body
It is critical that you align your body and aim your 
clubface correctly in relation to the target.  If you make 
a good golf swing but are aiming incorrectly you will hit the ball in the wrong direction. To aim correctly:
•  Stand about three feet behind the golf ball and 
select a spot on the target line no more than a few feet in front of the ball. The target line is an imaginary line that connects the golf ball to your intended target. •  When you have selected your spot, walk up to  the ball with your eyes looking at that spot and place the clubface behind the golf ball facing the spot and target.  
•  Make sure to keep looking at the target as you set your feet the correct width and take your proper address position.
Overlapping grip
THE PGA OF AmERiCA
Target Line
Intermediate
target
27FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidETHE SKiLLS OF GOLF
26CHAPTER 4
Full Swing
Now that your body is in the proper address position 
it is time to move your body, arms and club.  As you 
swing the club the trunk will turn to move the club backward and forward and the arms will move the club up and down.  It is also important to make sure the hands and arms stay in front of the torso throughout the golf swing.
Proper movement of the shoulders:
•  Place a golf club across your shoulders and criss-cross your hands to opposite shoulders. 
•  Turn your shoulders 90 degrees away from the target line.
•  Turn your shoulders back to zero degrees to the target line with your trail shoulder turning down toward the ball. 
•  Turn forward 90 degrees to the target line with your trail shoulder finishing clos-est to the target.  This will teach you the proper motion of the body in the golf swing.
Proper movement of the arms and golf club:•  As your shoulders turn away from the target line, simultaneously the trail arm and wrist will fold vertically up until the top of the backswing. The target arm will maintain extension.•  At the top of the backswing your hands should be in front of your chest between your shoulders.  
•  As your shoulders return to the ball (zero degrees) the trail arm and wrist will straighten up through impact. As the shoulders turn through to the finish (90 degrees) position the target wrist and arm will hinge up over the target shoulder while maintain-ing extension of the right arm.
In order to hit the ball most efficiently you must 
maintain a steady spine angle from start to finish. This is accomplished by keeping the hips pushed back 
through out the swing. 
Bunker Shots
Bunker shots are swings where the objective is to hit 
the sand underneath the ball and the ball flies out with the sand. The image of taking a slice of sand the size of a dollar bill seems to work for most golfers.
First, go through your aim and alignment drill. After 
you have your target line and your intermediate target set, then place your hands on the grip. Many players make the mistake of gripping the club first and then rotating the shaft to open the clubface. Remember that your club cannot touch the sand in a bunker, otherwise you incur a two-stroke penalty for grounding your club in the hazard.There are four factors that control the height and distance of your shots:•  The more loft you add to the clubface by moving the shaft back at address, the higher and shorter the ball will carry.
•  The steeper the angle of your approach into the ball, the higher and shorter the shot.
•  The more clubhead speed a swing generates, the farther the ball will carry.
•  The more sand you displace under the ball, the shorter the shot.
THE PGA OF AmERiCAAnnika
SorenstamJim Furyk
29THE SKiLLS OF GOLF
28CHAPTER 4
Chipping
Whatever club you’ve selected for this chip, set the 
angle of the shaft so it is more vertical and resembles 
the upright angle of your putter. When you address the ball, the club should rest more on the toe than it would for a full shot. The grip end of the club should be pointing towards the middle of your body, and your weight should be evenly distributed between the balls of your feet and the heels. Bear in mind that a chip is   very much a “one-lever” stroke. Ken Venturi, who had one of the best short games in history, likes to tell people to imagine their hands were molded together in a cast when chipping.  Almost everyone agrees that you want to grip the club lightly, since this helps promote better feel. And always try to keep the back of your left or top hand moving on a line parallel to the target line. This will help keep the clubface square to the target.
Pitching
The basics of good pitching mirror those of chipping. 
Employ your full-swing grip with a light grip pressure and play from a slightly open stance. A slightly open stance pre-clears your hips and helps you deliver the club directly along the target line. What varies when hitting a pitch shot is the ball position, both in your stance and relative to the position of your hands at address and impact. If you have a tight lie off close-cropped grass, or a poor lie in the rough, you need to play the shot with your hands slightly ahead of the ball,   with the ball back slightly in your stance. This will cause the ball to fly on a lower trajectory and run far-ther. As the lie improves, you can position the ball more towards the middle of your stance, with your hands either even with the ball or fractionally behind. This will allow you to employ the full loft of the club. Given a consistent ball position, the more you position your hands behind the ball, the more effective loft you add to the club, the higher the ball will fly and the  softer it will land.
Juli Inkster
Justin Leonard
FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE THE PGA OF AmERiCA
5CHAPTER
Every golfer will find it helpful to know why the golf ball flies as it does.  
The ball flight laws are based on the principles of physics. 
31FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
Ball Flight Laws
30THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 4
Putting
The two main factors in putting are distance con-
trol, which is determined by the backward and forward 
swing of the club, and direction, which is determined by where the clubface is pointing  at impact. At address, your ankle joints should  be under your shoulders. Push your hips back  and up and let your arms hang naturally from  your shoulders. Your eyes should be directly over  the ball since placement is crucial to help ensure  solid contact. As with other shots the best way to aim the ball properly is to pick out an intermediate  target on your target line a foot or two ahead of the ball. Align the blade of your putter and the ball to this target. Your grip should be light and comfortable and needs to provide control and accuracy. Unlike the full-swing grip, there are a variety of ways to grip the putter that range from a split grip with hands apart to a cross-handed grip. Whatever is most comfortable for you and allows your hands to work together is the best grip for you.
Grace Park sank a 10-foot putt on the final hole to win the Junior PGA 
Championship in 1996.  Today, she is a leading money winner on the LPGA Tour.
Tiger Woods
33FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEBALL FLiGHT LAWS
The position of the clubface at impact determines 
whether the ball flies straight in the air.  For a right-
handed golfer, an open clubface produces a curve to the right (slice) and a closed clubface produces a shot that curves to the left (hook).  Curve - The position of the clubface at impact
32THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 5
Nine possible flight directions may occur.  These 
directions are determined by the club path, clubface 
position and ball velocity.  The ball may fly in three directions – right, straight or left – with three-clubface positions – open, square or closed.  The combinations of these factors determine the initial direction and  curvature of the ball in flight.
direction - The path of the swing
The direction of the ball’s flight 
is caused by the direction of the 
club, with respect to the target line, as it moves through the ball.  It’s like throwing a ball at a target, the hand (in the case of a thrown ball) should point to the target at the release of the ball.  The ball travels in the direction it is released.  This concept applies to golf.  For a right-handed golfer, if a shot goes to the left (a pull) the club was moving along a path that traveled to the left at impact.  If the shot traveled right (push), the swing path was travel-ing right at impact.Path
Face
Hoo k
Straigh t
SlicePull Hook
Pull
SliceClosed
Square
OpenHoo k
Push
Push Slice
34THE PGA OF AmERiCASkill Practice6CHAPTER
Golf, like any other skill, requires practice for improvement.  Practice sessions usually occur at 
a learning center, a practice range or in a space large enough to accommodate the particular 
skill being practiced.  Practice provides the repetition that leads to more accurate and  
consistent shots.  The most effective practice sessions focus on one area that needs to be 
improved.  Golf is a target game.  A variety of shots should be practiced to different directions 
and distances.  Practice only as long as you can remain focused.  Practice ranges are marked 
for yardage to aid you in determining your club selection.
35FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEPGA Golf Club 
South Course - 18th hole
37FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidESKiLL PRACTiCE
36THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 6
Golf swings require movement in both the upper and 
lower body.  Therefore it is important to warm up and 
stretch the major muscle groups involved in the golf swing.  Stretching is most effective when the muscles are warm.  You can elevate your body temperature by  a brisk walk or by performing a few minutes of easy practice swings.  All stretches should be performed without bouncing and should be held for a minimum of 15 seconds to receive maximum benefit.  Move into the stretch until you feel a slight resistance in the muscles and joints and then hold.  Remember to breathe during the stretch.
These stretches are designed to prepare the upper 
body for the golf swing movement.
upper Body Stretches
1.   Shoulder/chest stretch - Position your hands on your golf club about a shoulder width apart.  Raise your club over your head and hold.  Press your golf club gently behind your head and hold.  To stretch    the chest, position the club horizontally behind your back with the hands positioned about a shoulder width apart.  Raise the club and hold to stretch the shoulder and chest.  Repeat as many times as necessary.2.   Tricep stretch - Position your right hand on the clubhead and place the golf shaft on your back.  Extend your right arm above your head and bend at the elbow.  Place your left hand on the grip end of the golf shaft to provide resistance for the stretch.  Repeat the stretch on the left side.
Warm-up Stretches
1 2 3 4
39FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidESKiLL PRACTiCE
2.  Trunk twister - Position your golf club across your 
shoulder joints, crossing your arms to hold the club.  While standing upright, rotate to your trail side, like a backswing, and hold.  Repeat twist to the target side like a follow-through and finish.
3.  Standing calf stretch - Find an immovable object (like a 
golf car) to lean forward on.  Position your feet about a shoulder width apart and about two feet from the golf car.  Lean forward while leaving the heels of your feet firmly planted on the ground.  Adjust your position relative to the car (move closer for less stretch, further for more stretch).  Lower body stretches
 1.  Hamstring/low back stretch - Place your feet 
about a shoulder width apart and lean forward with    your arms hanging down.  Make sure you do not bounce.  Hold the stretch and repeat as needed.
38THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 6
3.  Lat stretch - Find an immovable object that you 
can grasp easily, often the frame on a golf car works well.  Place your right hand and left hand on the car frame slightly below shoulder height.  Bend slightly at the waist and pull away from the golf car.  Reverse your hand position to repeat the stretch on the left side.
1
23
41FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidESKiLL PRACTiCE
The following drills are designed to teach you related 
concepts and help you get the most out of your prac-
tice time.  Each drill is designed to improve your golf swing mechanics and/or give you an idea about the swing itself.Practice drills
40THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 6
4.  Quadriceps stretch - Find an immovable object to hold on to as you stretch.  While standing on one 
leg, bend the knee and grasp the ankle of the non-support leg.  Repeat the stretch on the other leg.
Acceleration drills - A proper swing accelerates through the impact position. The term release is often 
used to describe this experience.  To perform the acceleration drills follow the directions provided below.
1.   Turn the club upside down and grip below the  
clubhead.  Produce a swing and listen to the whoosh sound at the bottom of the swing or impact area.  The louder the whoosh, the faster your swing.
12
2.   Repeat the whoosh drill with the club in the  
normal golf swing position.  Focus on hearing the club accelerate at the bottom of the golf swing.
43FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
34
42THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 6
1.  Baseball swing - Stand erect and make several 
baseball-type swings with your golf club.  Notice 
the wrist and arm action.  Continue to swing as you bend over.  Once you have reached the golf swing position repeat the drill.
1
2SKiLL PRACTiCE
44THE PGA OF AmERiCACHAPTER 6
Golf Swing Coordination drills - These drills are a good way to learn to swing a golf club.  
They provide you with practice opportunities that allow you to coordinate your arm swing with your body movement.
Basic Golf Swing exercise Drill 
- Take your address position and place the 
palms of your hands together.
1
2 3
Swing arms back with body turnTwo thumbs up in line with 
shoulder tiltTurn and swing arms forward 
with body turn
4
Two thumbs up in line with  
shoulder tilt
45FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidESKiLL PRACTiCE
Grass-Cutting Drill  - Imagine that you are cut-
ting grass with the clubhead.  Let the club swing back 
and forth without stopping.  Make sure you complete the whole swing each time.  The non-stop swinging helps you coordinate the timing of your arms, hands and body when making the swinging motion.  Your hands and arms swing the club as your body pivots.
4
31 2 2
46
CHAPTER 6
one and Two Drill  - A proper swing accelerates 
through the impact position. The term release is often 
used to describe this experience.  To perform the accel-eration drills follow the directions provided below.
and Two
THE PGA OF AmERiCARhythm and Tempo drills - The golf swing is one continuous and rhythmic movement that starts 
smoothly back, changes direction at the top, and then speeds up gradually to the finish (SLOW-FAST-SLOW).  The complete swing lasts from 2 to 3 seconds.
You can swing at different tempos (rate of speed) but you must always keep your swing in rhythm. 
One7CHAPTER
47FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidETesting Your Skills
Golf’s ultimate test of skills is play on the golf course.  Playing golf skill games will  
indicate where one needs to improve. Try these games to determine what skills you need to 
strengthen.  Skill testing is also a way to chart your improvement.  
48THE PGA OF AmERiCA
49FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidETESTinG YOuR SKiLLS
Accurate chip and pitch shots can save many strokes 
when playing on the golf course.  A good test of chip-
ping and pitching accuracy is the Up and Down test.  The Up and Down test can be used for either skill.  For this test scatter five balls no closer than 35 feet (12 paces) from a hole on the putting green.  Choose a club to chip with and hit a shot.  In the event that you miss hit a chip, continue to chip until the ball is on the green.  Once the ball is on the green, take your putter and attempt to 1-putt the chip into the target hole.  This is called “up and down.”  Tally the number of chips and putts that it takes to hole out each ball.  Repeat the test by increasing the distance no closer than 40 to 60 feet (15 to 20 paces) with a pitching wedge.
up and down Test
Shot Needs Improvement Good Very Good Tour Professional
Chip 15 or more 13 to 14 10 to 12 10 to 11
Pitch 18 or more 15 to 17 12 to 14 10 to 12
This test is used to assess the accuracy and distance 
of your approach shots.  Select your 5-iron to complete 
the test.  Choose a target green (25-yard circle around the green) that matches your current 5-iron distance ability.  Hit 10 shots.  Shots score a one if they land on the green.  The best score for this test is 10.middle iron Approach Shot
Shot Needs Improvement Good Very Good Tour Professional
5 Iron Less than 3  3 to 5 6 to 8 9
This test is similar to the Middle Iron Approach 
Shot test.  Determine your driving distance.  Set an 
imaginary restraining line 25 yards short of the target distance.  Hit 10 shots.  Record the number of shots out of 10 that pass the restraining line and stay within a 30-yard wide fairway.driving Test
Shot Needs Improvement Good Very Good Tour Professional
Driver Less than 3  3 to 5 6 to 8 8 to 10CHAPTER 7
Choose a starting position three feet (one putter 
length) from the hole.  Attempt to 1-putt from 
five  different locations around the hole.   Continue around the hole.  The more putts you make the better your short putts are.  If you make all 3-foot putts surrounding the hole, back up one or two feet and begin again.  See how many putts you can make in succession.  Putt from different positions to different holes on the green.
Distance Needs Improvement Good Very Good Tour Professional
4 feet Less than 2 putts 3 to 4 putts 5 putts  5 putts
6 feet Less than 2 2 to 3 putts 4 to 5 putts 4 to 5 puttsShort Putt - Circle of Threes
A fun way to measure your long putting ability is to 
create a mini-course on the putting green.  Select five putts that range from 10 to 30 feet.  The goal of the test is to 2-putt or less on each of the holes you have selected.  Place a tee in the green to mark the start-ing point for each hole.  Begin around the course and record the number of putts that you make on each hole.  Keep a running score and total all the putts once you have completed the course.  A perfect par score would equal 10 putts (an average of two putts on each hole).Long Putt
Needs Improvement Good Very Good Tour Professional
13 putts or higher 11 to 12 putts 10 putts 9 putts
The game of golf is governed by many rules.  Generally a few basic rules apply to most situations.  In fact, this one 
simple statement will give you the entire philosophy of the Rules of Golf:
“Play the course as you find it, play the ball as it lies, and play fairly.”Rules of the Game
50THE PGA OF AmERiCA8CHAPTER
51FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEPGA Golf Club 
North Course - 12th Hole
53FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
52THE PGA OF AmERiCA FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidERuLES OF THE GAmE
If you find your ball in a place where you can’t play 
it, except in a water hazard, add a penalty stroke and 
drop the ball one of the following ways:•  Where you originally played from
•  Back on a line, behind where the ball lies and  the hole
•  Two club lengths from the ball, no closer to  the hole.
dropping a ball 
When you have to drop a ball, stand up straight with 
the ball at shoulder height and at an arms length and drop it.  Make sure you are not dropping closer to the hole than where the original ball was positioned.Ball unplayable
immovable Obstructions and Abnormal 
Ground Conditions
If your ball lands on, you stand on, or the area of your intended swing is interfered with by –a car path, a sprinkler 
head, ground under repair or casual water – you are allowed a free drop providing the ball is not in a water hazard. You must, however, drop your ball within one club length from the point where you are clear from the car path or ground under repair, not nearer the hole.
CHAPTER 8
One reason that golf is so popular is because it is played by standard rules based on fair play.  When golf originated 
there were only 13 Rules of Golf.  In 1894 the United States Golf Association (USGA) brought the rules to this 
country.  Today, the Rules of Golf are contained in a pocket-sized book that is carried by almost all players on the professional tour and by most ranking amateurs.  If there is any question about how a rule is applied, the USGA maintains a “Decisions on the Rules of Golf” book, to clarify and interpret rules on a case-by-case basis.  
When you boil it all down, a few basic rules for fair play are all you need to remember.  Here are the basic Rules of 
Golf you need to know before playing the game.  In tournament-competitive play you are expected to carry, and be familiar with the Rules as published by the USGA, as well as any local rules that might be in effect.  When in doubt about a ruling, ask your PGA Professional.
If you lose your ball or the ball goes out of bounds, 
you must add a penalty stroke and replay the shot as near as possible at the spot from which the original ball was last played (Stroke and Distance).  When you’re not sure you can find your ball or you think it might have traveled out of bounds, play an extra ball (provi-sional) to save time. Ball Lost or Out of Boundsmis-hits (whiffs)
You count a stroke anytime you swing at the ball—even if you miss it.  Practice swings are not counted as strokes.Accidental movement  
of the ball  
If you cause the ball to accidentally move when in the fairway, rough or on the green, you normally incur a 1-stroke penalty under Rule 18 and you must replace your ball.
Playing the ball as it lies  
You can’t touch the ball unless the Rules say you can.  The ball may be marked, lifted, cleaned and replaced when it is on the putting green.Counting Your Strokes
54THE PGA OF AmERiCA
55RuLES OF THE GAmE
There are two types of objects on the course that 
could interfere with your play.  Artificial objects such 
as rakes, bottles, etc. are called obstructions and can be removed so that you can play your ball.  If an obstruc-tion is immovable, like a shed or water cooler, you are allowed to drop away without penalty no nearer to the hole.  Natural objects like leaves, branches, insects, etc. are called loose impediments, and can be removed everywhere except in a hazard as long as they are not growing or fixed, solidly embedded and do not adhere to the ball.movable Obstructions and Loose 
impediments
CHAPTER 8
Two types of water hazards, regular and lateral 
are found on golf courses.  A regular water hazard, 
marked with yellow stakes, is usually located so that you can only drop behind where the ball entered in line with the hole to replay the shot.  A lateral water hazard, marked with red stakes, runs along the edge of the fairway.  A ball that enters a lateral water hazard may also be dropped up to two club lengths from the hazard and no closer to the hole from where the ball entered the water or equidistant to the hole on the other side of the lateral water hazard as additional options under the water hazard rule.  If your ball lands in the water a one-stroke penalty is incurred.Water Hazards
FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidE
57FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGlossary
56THE PGA OF AmERiCA
PGA Golf Club 
ClubhouseTarget Side – Trail Side
In golf, we talk about the Target Side of the body, which is the side of the body closest to the target.   
The side away from the target is the Trail Side.
59FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Bogey 
A score of one-over par on a hole. (The bogey on 18 
cost him the championship.)
Borrow 
The amount of break a player allows for when hitting a breaking putt. (One of the confusing factors for young players at Augusta National is learning how much they have to borrow on their putts.)
Bowed 
The position of the wrists at the top of the backswing in which the top wrist is bent slightly inward. (For many years, Tom Weiskopf had a bowed wrist at the top of his backswing.)
Break 
The amount a putt will curve to the side because of the slope, grain and wind that effect the movement of the ball. (The swale in the middle of the green produced a tremendous break on Palmer’s putt.)
Bump and run 
A pitch shot around the green in which the player hits the ball into a slope to deaden its speed before set-tling on the green and rolling towards the hole. (The mounds and swales at Pinehurst #2 resulted in many players hitting bump and runs shots during the Open.)
Bunker 
A hollow comprised of sand or grass or both that exists as an obstacle and, in some cases, a hazard. (The greens at Winged Foot were protected by deep bunkers.)
Caddie 
A person hired to carry clubs and provide other assis-tance. (A good caddie can be worth several strokes a round.)
Calcutta 
An auction in which people bid on players or teams in a tournament. (For many years, Calcuttas were a regular event at many popular tournaments.)
Cambered Sole 
A rounding of the sole of the club to reduce drag. A four-way cambered sole is one that is rounded at every edge of a wood. (The 5-wood had a cambered sole to help it slide through the deep rough.)Carry 
The distance a ball will fly in the air, usually to carry a hazard or safely reach a target. (Many of the holes at Pine Valley require a substantial carry over waste areas.)
Carryover 
When a hole is tied in a match and the bet is carried over to the next hole. (He won the 10th hole as well as the carryover.)
Casting 
An uncocking of the wrists prematurely on the down-swing, resulting in a loss of power and control. Also known as “hitting from the top.” (Smith had a tenden-cy to swing at and not through the ball, which caused him to cast the club from the top of the swing.)
Cavity-back 
A type of iron in which a portion of the back of the clubhead is hollowed out and the weight distributed around the outside edges of the clubhead. (The cavity-back irons were far more forgiving that his old blades.)
Center of Gravity 
That point in the human body, in the pelvic area, where the body’s weight and mass are equally balanced. (Ian Woosnam has a lower center of gravity than the much-taller Nick Faldo.)
Centrifugal Force 
The action in a rotating body that tends to move mass away from the center. It is the force you feel in the downswing that pulls the clubhead outward and down-ward, extending the arms and encouraging to take a circular path. (Tiger Woods’ swing creates powerful centrifugal force.)
Center of rotation 
The axis or swing center that the body winds and unwinds around during the swing. (A stable center of rotation is an important element in solid ball-striking.)
Chicken Wing 
A swing flaw in which the lead elbow bends at an angle pointed away from the body, usually resulting in a blocked or pushed shot. (Once Jack’s PGA Professional saw him, he knew the cause of Jack’s loss of power was his chicken wing position at impact.)
58THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
acceleration
The steady increase in speed most often associated with 
the hands, arms or club. (Tiger Woods has tremendous acceleration through the hitting area.) 
address
The act of setting the body and club up to the ball when preparing to hit a shot. (Every golfer could profit from studying Jack Nicklaus’s address position.) When used in the context of the Rules of Golf, it refers to the point when the player has taken his stance and grounded his club. (The ball moved after he addressed it, resulting a one-stroke penalty.)
aiming
The act of aligning the clubface to the target. (She had a problem aiming the club properly all day and missed several shots to the right of her target.)
alignment
The position of the body in relation to the initial target. (One reason she plays so well is that her alignment is so consistent from one shot to the next.)
angle of approach (or attack) 
A term that describes the relative angle which the club-head approaches the ball at impact which, in turn, helps determine the distance and trajectory which the ball travels. (He hit the ball with a sharply descending angle of attack, which caused the ball to fly high enough to carry over the tall trees.)
approach 
A shot hit towards the green. (His approach shot to the 17th hole came up short of the green) or towards the hole (Sam Snead was a great approach putter.)
axis 
Generally refers to a straight line (the spine) that the upper body rotates around in the course of the golf swing. (One reason for her consistent ballstriking is that her axis remains in a constant position throughout the swing.)
Backswing 
The motion that involves the club and every element of the body in taking the club away from the ball and setting it in position at the top of the backswing from which the club can be delivered to the ball at impact. (John Daly has an unusually long backswing that causes the club to go past parallel at the top of the swing.)Backspin 
The rotational movement or spin of the ball produced by contact with the clubface. The greater the backspin, the higher the ball will fly and the more it will spin, and therefore stop or even spin backwards on impact with the turf. (The ball had so much backspin that when it hit the green it spun back into the water hazard.)
Balance 
The proper distribution of weight both at address and throughout the swing. (Tom Watson’s swing has always been characterized by perfect balance.)
Balata 
A rubber-like substance used as a cover material for golf balls. Pure balata is rarely, if ever, used today. Instead, manufacturers use blends or synthetic material. Many players prefer balata or balata-like covers because it provides a softer feel. And it can provide increased spin. (Most of the players in the championship played with balata-covered balls.)
Baseball Grip 
A grip in which all ten fingers are placed on the grip of the club. (Bob Rosburg was a very successful player who used a baseball grip.)
Birdie 
A score of one-under par on a hole. (Her birdie on the 10th hole was a turning point in the match.)
Bladed Shot 
Often referred to as a “sculled” shot, it occurs when the top half of the ball is struck with the bottom por-tion of an iron, resulting in a low-running shot. (She bladed her approach shot but the ball ran onto the green and set up her putt for a birdie.) 
Block 
A swing in which the rotation of the forearms is delayed or prevented throughout the hitting area, gen-erally producing a shot that flies to the right of the tar-get.  (With a pond guarding the left side of the green. Ernie Els blocked his approach shot to the right of the flag.)
Bobbing 
The act of raising and lowering (or lowering and rais-ing) the swing center in the course of the swing. (Because of an inconsistent knee flex in her swing, her bobbing led to inconsistent ball striking.)
61FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Conservation of angular Momentum 
(CoaM) 
A law of physics that allows the player to produce large 
amounts of kinetic energy. As the body shifts its weight and turns towards the target in the forward swing, the mass (arms and club) is pulled away from the center into an extended position by centrifugal force. By tem-porarily resisting that pull as well as the temptation to assist the hit by releasing too early, one maintains the angle formed between the club’s shaft and the left arm and conserves the energy until a more advantageous moment. This has been referred to as a “delayed hit,” a “late hit,” “connection,” “lag loading,” “the keystone,” or COAM, but when performed correctly may simply be called “good timing.”
Croquet Style 
A putting stance popularized by Sam Snead in which the player stands aside the ball, facing the hole, holds the club with a widely-split grip, and strikes the ball with a croquet-type stroke. A similar style, in which the player faced the hole with the ball positioned between the feet, was banned by the United States Golf Association. (A croquet-style putting stroke is popular among players who suffer from the “Yips.”)
Cross-Handed  
A grip in which the left (or lead) hand is placed below the right hand (in other words, a grip that is the oppo-site of the traditional grips. (Bruce Lietzke used a cross-handed grip when putting and was very successful.) 
Cupped Wrist 
A position in which the left or top hand is hinged out-ward at the top of the backswing. (Her cupped wrist caused the club to be pointed to the left of the target at the top of her swing.)
Cuppy Lie 
A lie when the ball is sitting down slightly, usually in a small depression. (He had a difficult shot because he had to play from a cuppy lie in the fairway.)
Cut Shot 
A shot played with a slightly open clubface and a swing path that travels out to in. The result is a soft fade that produces additional backspin and causes the ball to stop quickly on the green. (Lee Trevino was known for his ability to play beautiful cut shots.) Dead Hands 
A shot in which the hands remain relatively passive in the hitting area, resulting in a shot that flies a shorter distance than it normally would. (He dead-handed a 5-iron on the par 3, which confused his fellow players.)
Deep-Faced Driver 
A driver with greater-than-standard height on its face. (His PGA Professional suggested trying a deep-faced driver.)
Decelerate 
A decreasing of the clubhead speed in the hitting area.  (Jones decelerated on his putt, and left it short of the hole.)
Delayed Hit 
A golf term used to describe the Conservation of Angular Momentum.
Divot 
The turf displaced when the club strikes the ball on a descending path. (Her divot flew into the pond.) It also refers to the hole left after play. (Her ball landed in an old divot, making her next shot difficult.)
Double Bogey 
A score of two-over-par on a hole. (The double bogey ended her hopes of defending her title.)
Double eagle 
A score of three-under-par on a hole. (Gene Sarazen’s double eagle at Augusta National is one of the most famous shots in golf history.)
Dormie 
The point in match play when a player is up in a match by the same number of holes that remain. (When Lanny  Wadkins had his opponent dormie three, it seemed like the Americans would win the Ryder Cup.)
Doubles
When a caddie carries two sets of clubs. (Carrying doubles was hard work in the hot weather, but he never complained.)
Downswing
The swing forward from the top of the backswing. (The clubhead accelerated smoothly on the downswing.)
60THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Chip and run 
A low-running shot played around the greens where 
the ball spends more time on the ground than in the air. (She saved par with a beautiful chip and run that ended inches from the hole.)
Choke 
A derogatory term describing poor play that results from nervousness. (Early in his career, some critics claimed Tom Watson choked under pressure.)
Choke Down
The act of gripping down on the shaft, which is gener-ally believed to provide greater control. (She choked down on a 7-iron and hit a beautiful pitch to save par.)
Chunk 
A poor shot caused by hitting the turf well behind the ball, resulting in a fat shot. (The defending champion’s defense ended when he chunked his tee shot on the  par- 3 16th and hit the ball into the pond guarding the green.)
Cleek 
A fairway wood with the approximate loft of a 4-wood that produces high shots that land softly. (He played a beautiful shot with his cleek that almost rolled into the cup.)
Closed Clubface 
The position formed when the toe of the club is closer to the ball than the heel, either at address or impact, which causes the clubface to point to the left of the target line. (Her closed clubface resulted in her missing several approach shots to the left of the green.) 
Closed Clubface (swing) 
A position during the swing in which the clubface is angled to the left of the target line or swing plane, generally resulting in shots hit to the left of the target. (When they looked at a videotape of his swing, his PGA Professional pointed to his closed clubface at the top of the backswing as the reason he hit his drive into the left rough.)
Closed Grip 
Generally referred to as a strong grip because both hands are turned away from the target. (PGA Tour  professional Ed Fiori was nicknamed “Grip” because of his closed grip.)Closed Stance 
A description of a stance when the rear foot is pulled back away from the target line. (Her closed stance allowed her to hit a gentle draw off the tee.)
Closed-to-open 
A swing in which the clubhead is closed on the back-swing but then manipulated into an open position on the downswing. (Miller Barber was a very effective play-er, even though he had a closed-to-open swing.)
Cocked Wrists 
A description of the hinging motion of the wrists dur-ing the backswing in which the hands are turned clock-wise. Ideally, the wrists are fully cocked at the begin-ning of the downswing. (He cocked his wrists early in the backswing to hit a high, soft shot over the bunker.)
Coefficient of restitution 
The relationship of the clubhead speed at impact to the velocity of the ball after it has been struck. This measure is affected by the clubhead and ball material. (Testing showed that the new ball had a very high coef-ficient of restitution.) 
Coil 
The turning of the body during the backswing. (Her ability to fully coil on the backswing resulted in tremen-dous power.)
Come over the Top 
A motion beginning the downswing that sends the club outside the ideal plane (swing path) and delivers the clubhead from outside the target line at impact. This is sometimes known as an outside-to-inside swing. (Sam Snead came over the top slightly, which he felt pro-duced more powerful shots.)
Compression 
A measure of the relative hardness of a golf ball ranging from 100 (hardest) to 80 (softest.) (Like most powerful players, he preferred a 100-compression ball.) 
Connection 
A description of a swing in which all the various body parts work harmoniously to produce a solid, fluid motion. (Many players focus upon connection as a key element in the golf swing.)
63FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Fluffy Lie 
A lie in which the ball rests atop the longish grass. This 
can be a tricky lie because the tendency is to swing the clubhead under the ball, reducing the distance it car-ries. (The ball came to rest in a fluffy lie near the green, but he played an excellent shot and won the hole.)
Fly 
The distance the ball carries (He can fly the ball 280 yards with his driver) or a shot that carries over the intended target (She flew the green with her approach shot and made a bogey.)
Follow-through 
That part of the swing that occurs after the ball has been struck. (His powerful follow-through was the result of his long backswing.)
Footwork 
The coordinated action of the lower body during the golf swing. (Tom Watson has some of the best foot-work of any player in history.)
Forward Press 
A slight movement of the hands and arms (and occa-sionally the legs) that initiate the golf swing. (A good forward press helps relieve tension in the golf swing.)
Forward Swing
The downward motion of the hands, arms and club from the top of the backswing to impact. Another term for downswing. (Ben Hogan began his forward swing with a lateral shifting of his left hip towards the target.)
Fried egg 
The slang term for a buried lie in the sand. (To her dismay, when Nancy Lopez reached the bunker she saw she was facing a fried egg lie.)
Grand Slam, The Modern (or Professional)
Grand Slam describes winning the four professional Major Championships—the PGA Championship, the Masters and the United States and British Opens—in a calendar year. The Career Grand Slam describes win-ning each of these events once in a career. Only Gene Sarazen, Ben Hogan, Gary Player, Jack Nicklaus and Tiger Woods have accomplished this. No one has ever won the Modern Grand Slam. In 1930, Bobby Jones won the U.S. and British Amateurs and Opens, a feat which was termed the Grand Slam and has never been duplicated. The 28-year old Jones retired from compet-itive golf that year. In addition, The PGA of America’s “Grand Slam of Golf” is a late-season event that fea-tures the winners of that year’s four Professional Major championships.  
Golf range 
A facility where people can practice their full swings and, in some cases, their short games. (In Japan, golf ranges are very popular because the number of golf courses is limited.)
Grain 
The direction which the blades of grass grow, which is of primary importance on the greens (particularly Bermuda grass greens) as this can effect how much and in which direction a putt breaks. (Sam Snead won many tournaments in Florida because he was so adept at read-ing the grain in the greens.)
Greenkeeper 
An older, outdated term for the course superintendent. (He was the greenkeeper at Merion for many years.)
Grip (equipment) 
That part of the golf club where the hands are placed. (After a disappointing round, John’s PGA Professional suggested that he have his grips replaced.)
Grip 
The placing and positioning of the hands on the club. The various types include the Vardon or overlapping, the interlocking and the 10-finger or baseball grip. (The Vardon grip is the most popular grip today.) There is also the reverse-overlapping grip, in which the index finger of the left or top hand overlaps the small-est finger of the right or bottom hand. This is primarily used in putting, although some players use this grip when chipping the ball.
Groove (equipment) 
The horizontal scoring lines on the face of the club that help impart spin on the ball. (Before teeing off on the par-3 12th, Jack Nicklaus cleaned out the grooves of his 8-iron with a tee.)
Groove 
A description of a swing that consistently follows the same path, time after time. (In his post-round inter-view, Curtis Strange said his swing was in the groove all day, resulting in a 65.)
62THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Draw 
A shot that flies slightly from right to left for right-
handed players. (She hit a draw into the green that stopped two feet from the hole.)
Driving range 
Another term for a practice area. Also known as a golf range, practice range or learning center. (Watson head-ed for the driving range following his round.)
Duck Hook 
A shot that flies sharply from right to left for right-handed players. It is usually hit unintentionally, since it is difficult to control. (He hit a duck hook from the tee and the ball flew out of bounds.)
Dynamic Balance 
Transferring the focus of weight appropriately during the golf swing while maintaining body control. (Sue worked with her PGA Professional on improving the dynamic balance of her swing.)
eagle 
A score of two-under-par on a hole. (His eagle on the 17th hole assured his victory.) 
early Hit 
When a player prematurely releases the cocking of the wrists on the downswing, resulting in a loss of power at impact. This is also known as “casting from the top.” (Her tendency to make an early hit made her one of the shortest hitters in the field.)
effective Loft 
The actual loft on a club at impact as opposed to the loft built into the club. Effective loft is determined by, among other things, the lie and the position of the hands relative to the ball at impact. (The uphill lie added effective loft to the club.)
explosion 
A shot played from a sand bunker, usually when the ball has buried or settled down into the sand. (He played a spectacular explosion shot from the bunker to save par.)
extension 
The width of the swing as measured by the target arm on the backswing and the trail arm on the follow-through. (Tiger Woods has beautiful extension in his swing.)Fade 
A shot that flies slightly from left to right. (She hit a gentle fade from the tee and never missed a fairway in the final round.)
Fanning 
An exaggerated opening of the clubface as the back-swing begins. (He fanned the club open on the back-swing and hit mostly slices.)
Fat Shot 
A description of a shot when the clubhead strikes the turf behind the ball, resulting in poor contact and a shot that comes up well short of the target. (She hit a fat shot from the tee on the par 3 and, as the ball sank from sight in the pond, so did her chances of victory.)
Flange 
A portion of the sole of a club such as a sand wedge or putter. (The wedge’s wide flange made it an effective club from the deep, powdery sand.)
Flat Swing 
A swing that is more horizontal and less vertical in plane than is typical. (Because he had a flat swing, he had to guard against hooking the ball.)
Flier 
A shot from the rough or in wet conditions that reduc-es the amount of backspin on the ball, causing it to fly lower and farther than it might under normal condi-tions. (She caught a flier from the light rough and hit her approach shot over the green.)
Flip Shot 
A shot, usually played with a wedge, that involves a wristy swing designed to hit the ball a short distance but with a lot of height. (He hit a flip shot over the bunker, landing the ball near the hole.)
Floater 
A ball struck from the deep grass that comes out slowly and travels a shorter distance because of the heavy cushioning effect of the grass between the ball and the clubface. (Gail caught a floater from the rough and hit her approach shot into the pond.)
Flop Shot 
Similar to a flip shot except that it involves a long, slower swing. (Phil Mickelson is a master at playing the flop shot.)
65FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Lag
A shot (usually a pitch, chip or putt) designed to finish 
short of the target. (Since the green was severely sloped from back to front, he hit a lag putt that stopped just short of the hole.)
Lateral Slide or Shift 
A movement early in the forward swing in which the hips begin to slide to the target and rotate, while at the same time, weight begins to shift from the trail side to the target side. The timing of this motion is crucial to a proper swing. (The commentators were impressed by the young player’s lateral shift.)
Lay off 
When the swing plane flattens out at the top of the back swing, it causes the club to point to the side of the target and the face to close. (His PGA Professional watched him hit a few balls and then told him that he was getting the club laid off at the top of his back-swing.)
Learning Center 
A complete practice and instruction facility, which may or may not be on the site of a golf course. (While there was no golf course nearby, she was able to work on her game at the local learning center.)
Level-Par 
A term describing a score of even par. (Jones was level-par after the first round of the Open.)
Lever System 
The skeletal system is composed of numerous bones which, in mechanical terms, act as levers. The two pri-mary levers in the golf swing are: 1) the target arm, comprised of the radius and ulna of the lower arm and the humerus in the upper arm, and 2) the club when the target wrist becomes cocked.
Lie 
As it relates to the ball, the position of the ball when it has come to rest. (He hit his drive into the rough, but luckily had a good lie.) As it relates to the club, it is the angle of the sole of the club relative to the shaft. (He liked the sand wedge but the lie was too flat.)
Lights-out 
A slang term describing an outstanding round or stretch of holes. (She played lights-out after the turn.)Line 
The intended path of the ball, usually referred to in the context of putting. (She judged the line perfectly and made the putt.)
Line of Flight 
The actual path of the ball. (There was a grandstand in his line of flight, so the Rules official allowed him to take a drop without penalty.)
Links 
The term for a course built on linksland, which is land reclaimed from the ocean. It is not just another term for a golf course. (The Old Course at St. Andrews is the most famous links in the world.)
Lob Shot 
A short, high shot, usually played with a wedge, designed to land softly. (He played a delicate lob shot over the bunker and saved his par.)
Loft 
The degree of angle on the clubface, with the least loft on a putter and the most on a sand wedge. (Tom Kite popularized the sand wedge with 60-degrees of loft.) It also describes the act of hitting a shot. (Kite lofted his approach over the pond.)
Long Irons 
The 1-4 irons. (The long irons are often difficult for people to hit, so PGA Professionals often recommend replacing them with fairway woods.)
Looking Up 
The act of prematurely lifting your head to follow the flight of the ball, which also raises the swing center and can result in erratic ballstriking. (Once she stopped looking up, her scoring improved dramatically.) 
Loop 
The shape of the swing when the backswing and for-ward swing are in different planes. (Jim Furyk has a distinct loop in his swing but his swing is very effec-tive.) Loop also refers to a round of golf. (The caddie finished his morning loop and then went right back out without eating lunch.)
64THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Ground 
When referred to in the Rules of Golf, it means the 
point when the club touches the ground (or water) prior to playing the shot. (It is against the Rules of Golf to ground your club in a hazard.)
Group Lesson 
A teaching session in which several pupils work with one or more PGA Professionals. This type of lesson is particularly effective for beginners, especially juniors. (The PGA of America offered group lessons for young-sters as part of the city’s summer recreation program.)
Half Shot
A shot played with an abbreviated swing and reduced swing speed. This shot is often played when trying to keep the ball out of a strong wind. (With so much at stake, Amy Alcott played a half shot to the final green and made a comfortable par.)
Heel 
The part of the clubhead nearest the hosel. (Fuzzy Zoeller addresses the ball off the heel of his driver.) A shot hit off the heel is said to be “heeled.”
Heel-and-Toe Weighted 
A club design where weight is distributed towards the heel and toe of a club, usually an iron, to reduce the effect of mis-hits. (When he played with heel-and-toe weighted irons, his scores improved.)
High Side 
The side of the hole that a putt breaks from. (He missed the putt on the high side of the hole.)
Hitter 
A player who favors a forceful, aggressive style of swing. (Arnold Palmer has been a hitter of the ball throughout his career.)
Hooding 
The act of placing the hands ahead of the ball, both at address and impact, which tends to reduce the effective loft of the club. (Because he was trying to hit his shot under the tree limbs, Tom Kite hooded a 6-iron and ran the ball onto the green.)
Hook 
A shot that curves sharply from right to left for right-handed players. (When playing the par-5 13th at Auguista National, many players try to hit a sweeping hook from the tee.)Hosel 
The part of the club connecting the shaft to the club-head. (When the PGA Professional studied Tom’s 5-iron, he saw that it was bent at the hosel.)
Impact 
The moment in the swing when the club strikes the ball. (Betsy’s feet slipped at impact, resulting in a poor drive.)
Inside-to-Inside 
A description of the swing path that, all things being equal, will produce the greatest percentage of solid, straight and on-target shots. It refers to a path in which the clubhead travels from inside the target line, to impact, and then back inside the target line. (Once she developed an inside-to-inside swing, her ballstriking improved dramatically.)
Inside-to-out 
A swing path in which the clubhead approaches the ball from inside the target line and, after contact, continues to the outside of the target line before turning back to the inside of the target line. (Every so often, his inside-to-out swing path resulted in shots that missed the tar-get to the right.)
Intended Line of Flight 
The direction a player plans for his ball to begin after impact. (Because she planned to hit a hook from the tee, her intended line of flight was at the right-hand fairway bunker.)
Iron Byron 
A testing device modeled after Byron Nelson’s swing. It is used to test clubs and balls. (After tests using Iron Byron, the new balls were measured to be longer.)
Kinesiology 
The scientific study of man’s movement and the move-ments of implements or equipment that he might use in exercise, sport or other forms of physical activity.
Kinetic energy 
The form of energy associated with the speed of an object. Its equation is: KE=Hmv
2(squared), or kinetic 
energy= H mass x velocity squared. (It is obvious from 
the formula that increasing clubhead velocity has more potential for producing distance than increasing the clubhead weight.)
67FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Path 
The direction the club travels during the swing or the 
putting stroke. This is best observed from an overhead view. (When they studied the videotapes in the learning center, they saw that she had a pronounced outside-to-in swing path.)
Pendulum Stroke 
In putting, a stroke that moves the clubhead back and forth on a constant line, without deviation. (His pendu-lum stroke made him a very effective putter.)
Pinch Shot 
A shot played around the green in which a player strikes the ball with a crisp, clean descending blow. (She pinched the ball off a perfect lie and holed the shot.)
Pistol Grip 
A grip, usually on a putter, that is built up under the left or top hand. (He had a pistol grip placed on his new putter.)
Pitch-and-run
A shot from around the green, usually with a middle or short iron, where the ball carries in the air for a short distance before running towards the hole. (She played a beautiful pitch-and-run to within a foot of the hole.)
Pivot 
The rotation of the body around a relatively fixed point, usually the spine. (Throughout his career, people have marveled at Fred Couples’ full pivot.)
Plumb-bob 
A method many players use to help them determine the amount a putt will break. It involves positioning your-self behind the ball and holding the putter vertically so it covers the ball. In theory, the shaft of the putter will indicate the amount the ball will break. It does not, however, measure the speed of the green, which is an important element is reading a putt. (Ryder Cup Captain Curtis Strange often plumb-bobs his putts.)
Plugged Lie 
The condition when the ball comes to rest in its own pitch mark, usually in a bunker or soft turf. (The ball plugged in the bunker, resulting in a difficult shot.)
Press 
To try and hit the ball harder than usual. (He thought he could carry the trees and so he pressed with his driver.) This also describes an extra effort to play well. (When he bogeyed the first two holes, he began to press.) In betting terms, it’s an additional bet made after a player falls behind in a match. (When he fell two-down in his match, he pressed.)
Pre-Shot routine 
The actions a player takes from the time he selects a club until he begins the swing. (Her pre-shot routine never varied when she was playing her best golf.)
Private Lesson 
Generally speaking, when a PGA Professional gives a lesson to a single pupil. (After losing in the club championship, she had a private lesson with her PGA Professional.)
Pronation 
An inward rotation of the hands towards the body’s centerline when standing in a palms-facing-forward position. (The term was inaccurately used for many years to describe the rotation of both hands through the impact area. In fact, one hand, the right, was pronating while the left was supinating. Obviously, it is impossible to pronate both hands through the shot.)
Pulled Hook 
A shot that begins to the side of the target line and continues to curve even further away. (He hit a pull hook off the 18th tee in the final round, but luckily the ball stayed in bounds.)
Pulled Shot 
A relatively straight shot that begins to the side of the target and doesn’t curve back. (She pulled her shot and ended up in the left-hand bunker.)
Pulled Slice 
A shot that starts well to the side of the target but curves back to the target. (He hit a pulled slice that landed safely on the green.)
Punch Shot 
A low-flying shot played with an abbreviated backswing and finish. The key to the shot is having the hands slightly ahead of the clubhead at impact, which reduces the effective loft of the club. (With the winds howling off the ocean, she played a beautiful punch shot into the green.)
66THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Loosened Grip 
Any time a player opens his fingers and loses control 
of the club. When this happens at the top of the back-swing, it is often referred to as “playing the flute.” (Once he made the grip changes his PGA Professional suggested, his problem with a loosened grip was cor-rected.)
Mechanics 
The mechanics of a golf swing or putting stroke. (Nick Faldo constantly works on the mechanics of his swing.)
Middle or Mid-irons 
The 5-7 irons. (He was very accurate with his middle irons, which helped set up a lot of birdies.)
Mulligan 
The custom of hitting a second ball—without penal-ty—on a hole, usually the first tee. (Mulligans are not allowed according to the Rules of Golf.)
nassau 
A competition in which points are awarded for winning the front nine, back nine and overall 18. (Nassaus are the most popular form of betting games.)
off-Green Putting
When a player elects to putt from off the green rather than chip. (She favored off-green putting because she lacked confidence in her chipping and pitching.)
offset 
A measure of the distance between the leading edge  of the hosel and the leading edge of the clubface.  (The added offset on his new irons helped reduce his slicing.)
one-Piece Takeaway 
Sometimes called the “modern” takeaway, it describes the beginning of the backswing when the hands, arms and wrists move away from the ball, maintaining the same relationship they had at address. (Sam Snead is credited with developing the one-piece takeaway.)
open Clubface 
When, either at address or during the swing, the heel of the clubhead is leading the toe, causing the clubface to point to the side of the target. (An open clubface caused him to hit his approach shot to the side of the green.)open Grip
Also referred to as a weak grip, it is when the hands are turned counter-clockwise on the club. (His open grip made it difficult for him to hook the ball.)
open Stance 
When the left or lead foot is pulled back farther from the target line than the rear or right foot. This stance generally helps promote a left-to-right ball flight. (Since she played from an open stance, it was easy for her to fade the ball around the large tree.)
open-to-Closed 
A description of the movement of the clubface when a player fans it open on the backswing and then closes it at impact. (When his timing was correct, his open-to-closed swing produced wonderful shots.)
outside-to-In 
A description of a swing path when the clubhead approaches the ball from outside the target line and then continues to the inside of that line following impact. (His outside-to-in swing path allowed him to hit his approach shot very near the pin, which was cut on the right side of the green.)
overclub 
To pick the wrong club, usually for an approach shot, causing the ball to go over the green. (He overclubbed his approach to the 18th green, and his ball came to rest in a shrub.)
Pace 
The speed of the golf swing (He had a beautiful pace to his swing) or the speed of the greens (The greens at the PGA Championship had a quick pace, which the better putters favored.)
Paddle Grip 
A putting grip with a flat surface where the thumbs rest. (Ben Crenshaw’s old putter had a paddle grip.)
Par 
The score an accomplished player is expected to make on a hole, either a three, four or five. (The 12th hole at Augusta National is one of the most famous par 3s in golf.)
69FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Shape 
To curve a shot to fit the situation. (His ability to shape 
a shot really impressed the older players.) The word is also used to describe the flight of the ball. (The usual shape of his shots was a fade.)
Short Game 
Those shots played on and around the green, including putting, chipping and pitching, and bunker shots. (To go along with his power, Tiger Woods has a phenom-enal short game.)
Short Irons 
The 8 and 9 irons and the pitching wedge. The sand wedge is considered a scoring or specialty club. (He wanted flatter-than-standard lies on his short irons.)
Shut 
A position in the swing when the clubface is closed rel-ative to the target line. (The cause of his poor driving was a shut clubface at the top of the backswing.)
Sky 
A high, short shot caused by the clubhead striking the underside of the ball. Also known as a “pop-up.” (He skied his tee shot and the ball barely reached the fair-way.)
Slice 
A ball that curves from left to right to a greater degree than a fade. (His game was plagued by a terrible slice that he developed as a youngster.)
Smothered Hook 
A low, right-to-left shot that dives quickly to the ground. The cause is an extremely closed clubface. (He hit a smothered hook from the tee, and the ball splashed into a nearby pond.)
Sole 
When referring to equipment, it is the bottom of a club. (The sole of his wedge had become rusty over the winter.) When referring to the swing, it is the point when the sole of the club touches the ground at address. (When he soled his club, the ball moved and he called a penalty on himself.)
Sole-Weighted 
A design, usually for fairway woods, that incorporates additional weight along the sole of the club. This makes it easier to get the ball into the air and is also effective from the rough. (Many players in the PGA Championship had sole-weighted clubs in their bags because of the deep rough.)
Splash Shot 
A shot played from a good lie in the bunker. The club “splashes” through the sand, throwing the ball into the air. (He splashed the ball out of the bunker, landing the ball within a foot of the hole.)
Spoon 
A term for a 3-wood that is seldom used today. (He reached the par 5 with a driver and a spoon.)
Spot 
Another term for marking the ball on the green so it might be lifted. (He put a spot on his ball so he could clean it before putting.)
Spot Putting 
Using an intermediate target such as a discolored blade of grass or an old ball mark as a means of aiming a putt. (Once he began spot putting, his scores began to improve.)
Square 
A term frequently used in golf. It can be used to describe a stance (his feet, hips and shoulders were all square to the target line) or the clubface (his club was perfectly square to the target line) or to describe con-tact with the ball (the key to greater driving distance is making square contact.) It can also refer to the status of a match (they were all-square (tied) at the turn.)
Stance 
The position of the feet at address. (He played most shots from an open stance.)
Steer 
An attempt to guide the flight of the ball that usually results in a loss of distance. (He tried to steer the ball off the first tee, but wound up hitting a weak push into the rough.) 
Straight-Faced 
The description of a club with very little loft, such as a driving iron, or a driver that lacks the standard bulge and roll. (Because of the strong winds, he often drove with a straight-faced iron.)
68THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Pushed Hook 
A shot that begins to the side of the target but curves 
back to the target. (Under the pressure of the final round, he hit a pushed hook from the tee of the 17th hole.)
Pushed Shot 
A shot that starts to the side of the target and never curves back. (He pushed his tee shot into the right rough.)
Pushed Slice 
A shot that starts to the side of the target and curves fur-ther away. (His pushed slice on the first hole flew out of bounds, setting the tone for the match.)
radius 
The distance between the center of the swing arc (the target or forward shoulder) and the hands on the grip. (Because of his unusually long arms, his swing had a large radius.)
raised Swing Center 
Elevating the central area in the body (somewhere between the top of the spine and the center of the neck) around which rotation takes place. What the novice fre-quently refers to as “looking up” and results in a swing that is too high.
rap 
To hit a putt with a short, firm stroke. (Former PGA Champion Gene Sarazen liked to rap his putts.)
reading the Green (or Putt) 
The entire process involved in judging the break and path of a putt. (Her caddie, Tom, was a genius at read-ing a green.)
recover 
To successfully hit a shot from a poor location. (Throughout his career, Arnold Palmer was known for his ability to boldly recover from trouble.)
release 
The act of freely returning the clubhead squarely to the ball at impact, producing a powerful shot. (Tiger Woods has a textbook release of the club at impact.)
reverse Weight Shift 
A swing flaw in which the weight moves forward on the backswing instead of to the back leg. (His reverse weight shift caused him to be a poor driver of the ball.)rhythm 
The coordination of movement during the golf swing or putting stroke. (For generations, Sam Snead’s golf swing has been the model of perfect rhythm.)
road Hole 
The par-4 17th hole at the Old Course at St. Andrews, one of the most famous and difficult holes in the world. (His approach on the Road Hole missed the green and cost him the British Open.)
round robin 
A tournament format in which players or teams play a variety of other teams, the winner being the player or team that accumulates the highest number of points. (The two brothers always teamed in the club’s Fall Round Robin.)
Scoring Clubs
The driver, putter and sand wedge. (He devoted much of his practice to the scoring clubs.)
Scramble 
To recover from trouble (Seve Ballesteros could scram-ble with the best of them) or a popular form of team play in which the team members pick the ball in the best position and everyone plays from that spot. (The mem-ber-guest was played in a scramble format.)
Semiprivate Lesson 
An instruction format where a limited number of pupils work with a Professional. (When the triplets wanted to take up golf, their parents arranged for them to take semiprivate lessons with their PGA Professional.)
Separation 
When any of the various body parts and/or the club move either faster or slower than the other elements of the swing. (He worked very hard to prevent his arms from separating on the downswing.)
Setup 
The process of addressing the ball, so that the club and body are properly aimed and aligned. (Since his setup was so good, he could occasionally recover from the slight errors in his swing.)
Shank 
When the ball is struck on the hosel of the club, usu-ally sending it shooting off to the right. (He hit a shank on his approach to the ninth hole, and the ball almost struck his caddie.)
71FiRST SWinG GOLFER’S GuidEGLOSSARY
Timing 
The sequence of motions within the golf swing. (Her 
timing was so good that it made up for her minor swing faults.)
Toed Shot 
Any shot hit off the toe of the club. (Facing a fast, downhill putt, he toed his approach putt and left it short of the hole.)
Topped Shot 
A low, bouncing shot caused by the bottom of the club striking the top half of the ball. (He topped his drive on the first tee and never regained his composure.)
Touch 
A player’s sense of feel, generally around the greens. (Ben Crenshaw has always had great touch.)
Trajectory 
The height and angle the ball travels when struck. (Great players are able to control the trajectory of their shots.)
Transition 
The change of direction in the swing, from the back-swing to the forward swing. (It’s very important to make a smooth transition in your swing.)
Uncock 
The release of straightening of the wrists during the downswing. (She uncocked her wrists prematurely, causing her to lose power in her swing.)
Upright 
A steeper-than-normal swing plane. (His upright swing helped him escape from the rough.) Upright also refers to a club’s lie in which the shaft is placed at a steeper-than-standard angle. (His PGA Professional suggested upright lies in his long irons.)
Vector 
A quantity or measure related to force that has both magnitude and direction. An important factor in deter-mining the distance and direction a ball travels.
Visualization 
A mental image of a swing or shot or even an entire round. (Once she began visualizing her shots, her scor-ing improved dramatically.)Waggle 
A motion or several motions designed to keep a player relaxed at address and help establish a smooth pace in the takeaway and swing. (His father told him to try and copy Sam Snead’s waggle.)
Weak Grip 
A term describing a grip where the hands are turned to the left for a right-handed player. (When Ben Hogan weakened his grip he began fading the ball.) 
Whiff 
A complete miss. Also known as an “air ball.” (He was so nervous that he whiffed his drive.)
Yips 
A condition, generally believed to be psychological, which causes a player to lose control of his hands and club. In Great Britain, the condition is referred to as the “Twitchies.” This generally occurs when putting or in the short game, but it can also afflict people when hitting a tee shot. (Bernhard Langer has fought the yips for much of his professional career.)
70THE PGA OF AmERiCAGLOSSARY
Stroke Play 
Also known as medal play, it is a form of competi-
tion based on the cumulative number of strokes taken, either over one round or several. (Most professional tournaments are stroke-play events.)
Strong Grip 
A term used to describe a grip in which the hands are turned counter-clockwise on the grip. It does not con-note a stronger-than-normal grip pressure. (Former PGA Champion Paul Azinger has a strong grip.)
Supination 
An outward rotation of the hands (thumbs turning out) away from the body’s centerline when standing in a palms-facing-the-body position. In the golf swing it is the right-hand rotation motion on the backswing and the left’s on the forward swing.
Swaying
An exaggerated lateral movement of the body on either the backswing, forward swing, or both, which results in inconsistent shotmaking. (His PGA Professional sug-gested a drill to correct his swaying.)
Sweet Spot 
The point on the clubface where, if it is struck with an object, the clubface will not torque or twist to either side. (To find the sweet spot on his putter, he held the grip with his thumb and forefinger and let it hang verti-cally. Then he tapped the face of the putter with the eraser-end of a pencil until the putter head moved back without any torquing or twisting.)
Swing arc 
The entire path the clubhead makes in the course of a swing. It is a combination of the swing’s width and length. (His swing arc resulted in tremendous clubhead speed.)
Swing Center 
A point, usually near the base of the neck and the top of the spine, around which the arms and upper body rotate during the swing. (Since his swing center remained constant throughout the swing, he was a very consistent ballstriker.)
Swinger 
A player whose swing is based on timing and rhythm, as opposed to “hitter,” whose swing is based on sheer power. (Gene Litter is a textbook example of a swing-er.)Swing Plane 
An imaginary surface that describes the path and angle of the club during the swing. (As a rule, tall players tend to have a more upright swing plane than shorter players.)
Swingweight 
A measure of the effective weight of a club. (His  driver had a D-8 swingweight, which is heavier than standard.)
Swingweight Scale 
A device for measuring swingweight. (Every PGA Professional knows how to use a swingweight machine.)
Takeaway 
The movement of the club at the start of the back-swing. (Her slow takeaway set the pace for her entire swing.)
Target Line 
An imaginary (often visualized) line drawn behind and through the ball to the point a player is aiming. If the player is planning to curve the ball, this point is the ini-tial – not the ultimate – target. (Jack Nicklaus visualizes his target line before every shot.)
Tee Box 
The area where players tee off to start a hole. (Robert Trent Jones designed long tee boxes.)
Tempo 
The speed of the swing (not necessarily the clubhead speed.) (Ernie Els has a beautiful tempo.)
Texas Wedge 
A term describing a shot played with a putter from well off the green. It is a good shot for players who lack confidence in their chipping and pitching, or in extremely windy conditions. (Under tournament pres-sure, he often played a Texas wedge, rather than risk chipping the ball.)
Three-Quarter Shot 
A shot played with a shortened backswing and lessened arm speed. (With the winds blowing off the ocean, he played a three-quarter shot into the 15th green.)
Tier 
A rise or level in a green or tee. (It was important to land you approach shot on the proper tier.)
the proFessional golFers’ association oF america
100 avenue of the champions
palm Beach gardens, Fl 33418
(561) 624-8400 • Fax: (561) 624-8448
www.pga.com
a pga publication
© 2004 the pga of america